






f NGLISH TRANSLATION, 


WITH THE 


S-a.nsk:kit text. 


OF THE 


T A T T V A-K A U M 

■■ , ■■■ .’'‘A" 

(SANKHYA) 


OF 


VACHASPATI MISRA, 

BY 

GANGInATHA Jill, M.A.;F.T.S. 

aOVBKUMKNT SCTIOLAR N. W. T. (16B8-00); 

MEDALLIST OP THE UJSllVKRSTTy OP ALLAHABAD; 

JIITBA MEDALLIST AND VIZIANAORAM SCHOLAR (QUEEN’s COLLEGE, 

LIBRARIAN, RAJ DARBIIANGA, . ^ 


Published for the 

BOMBAY "TBEOSOPJIICAL PUBLiCATlON FUND’*, 

BY ■ 

TOOKAMM tatta, F.T.8. 




Price 2 J^peec. 



BOMBAY: 


I'RIXTKD AT THK '* TATTVA-VIVKCHAKA ' 



PREFACE 


For the little we know of Vachasjiati Misra the reader 
i>s referred to the Sanskrit Introdnction ; wherein it is shown 
that he was a Maithila Brahmaua and flourished somewhere 
about the 9th (Hentury A. 1). For IJdayauacluirya the author 
of the *\Parisnddi” on Vacliaspati Misra’s "‘Tatparya-Tika,’* 
flonrishSU in tlio reijL^ii of king Lakshinana Sen of Bengal, — of 
whose era we have jnst oe-mmeuced the 8th century ; and at 
least a century rnnst have elapsed before a work could 
deserve the* honor of a commentary at the hands of 
IJdayanacliarya. 


I take this opportunity to thank my friend Bahi Govinda- 
dasa of Benares, to whom I owe more than 1 can express, — 
who has been chiefly instrumental in my niulertakiiig and 
finishing — not only of the present traiislatioii, but al^o of the 
Kavyaprakiisa and tlie NyAj^a — Muktavali, and some works on 
Mimiuisii. My thanks arc also due to Tookaram Tatya Esq, 
of Bombay for his publication of the work, and also to the 
proprietors of the Theosophist ” of Madras for allowing a 
reprint of the translation whicli first appeared in the columns 
of that excellent journal. 


Raj Ltbhauy, Darbita>{GA : 

1st July 1896, 


\ 


GANGANATHA JHA. 




LIST QF CONTENTS. 


Mr^v4ition • •• ••• <!»• ••• 

KABIKA I. 


SM XTii-zxifi 


1 Benediction ••• ••• •• 

2 Introduction to Earika I ••• 

3 Kecessity of Scientific Enquiry 

4 Threefold Division of Pain 

5 Obj^tion-Inqniry Superfluous 

^ Beply ••• ••• ••• ••• •• 

7 Auspiciousness of the beginning word 


••ff 


••• 


i 

1 

% 

% 

a 

4 

4 


K4BIKA n. 




8 

Objection* Adequacy of Vedlc means... 

••• 

... 

«#a 

... 

4 

8 

Similarity of the Yedic with the Obvious means 


• so 


S 

io 

Impurity, Decay and Excessiveness of the Yedic means 

• •• 

• a. 

d* 

11 

The Impurity of animal-slaughter in Sacrifice 

... 


• e. 

« 

12 

Nonpermanence and Excess of the results of Yedic rites 


..a 

T 

18 

Immortality from Yedic rites means long-durability 


a.a 

7 

14 

Discriminative wisdom the only means 

... 

• •• 


a. a 

7 

15 

Literal Interpretation of the Earika ••• 

... 

• •• 


•aa 

ft 

16 

Source of discriminative Enowledge... 

... 



... 

* 


EARIEA m. 






17 

Fourfold Division of Categories 



• 

... 

9 

18 

The Productive (1) 

... 

• •• 

• ■a 

... 

ft 

19 

The Productive-product (2) ... 

... 

• •• 

• •• 

... 

ft 

80 

The Products (3)' 



• • • 

... 

10 

^1 

The non-product— non-productive (4) 

... 

• • • 

... 


10 


EARIKA IV. 






22 

The three kinds of Proof 

... 

• •• 


... 

10 

23 

Proof defined 

... 

... 

*•« 


11 


The three-foldness of proof 

• • • 


• ft 

... 

11 


Only three kinds of proof ... ... 


« • • 

• • • 

... 

11 

26 

The inclusion of all other proofs in the above-mentioned 

... 

18 

27 

NediBSsity of enquiry into the different kinds of proof 

• •• 

..a 

12 

28 

The Older <A SzplftiutiOB ...* 

... 

tt V 


... 

it 








29 

Spedfic definitions of the proofs 

... 




12 

80 

“ Femption ” defined ... 



• «• 

' . • 

U 



VI 


/ PAOB* 

31 Insezitienceof 13 

32 Differentiation of " Perception ” from the other forms of proof •... 14 

38 “ Inference ” as a distinct form of proof 14 

34 Inference defined 15 

35 The throe kinds of Inference 15 

33 The first Division of Inference .! 16 

37 The Negative — aiiosteriori — Inference 16 

38 The Affirmative — a priori — Inference 16 

89 “ Valid Testimony ’* based on Inference 17 

40 Self-evidence of ... 18 

41 Srutis and Puranas included in Valid Testimony 18 

42 Pretended Revelations 18 

43 Differentiation of Valid Testimony from Inference ... «?.. 18 

44 Other kinds of proof set aside or included in above 19 

45 Analogy, included in Valid Testimony ‘ 19 

46 “Apparent Inconsistency ” included in Tnfei^mcc ... 20 

47 “ Negation ” included in “ Perception *’ ... 21 

48 “ Probability ** in Inference 22 

49 Rumour discarded 22 

KARIKA VI. 

50 Introduction 22 

51 Knowledge of Nature &c., through Inference 23 

62 Knowledge of others by Revelation 23 


KARIKA VTI. 

53 Objection — Nature &c., being not**amcnablo to the senses, are 

no7i-existing 23 

54,55 Different causes of non-perception of objects by the Senses 24—25 

66 Non-per(^ption of an object, no proof of non-existence 26 

KARIKA VIII. 

67 Objection-existence of Nature can be denietl like that of sky- 

flowers-started, and set aside : there are effects bearing testimony 

to the existence of Nature 26 

58 Such effects mentioned ... 26 

KIUIKA IX. 

69 Different views with regard to the nature of an effect ... 26 

60 Impossibility of the existence of Nature being proved in acconl- 

ance with the Vedanta and Bauddha tenets 27 

61 Effect declared to be a permanent Entity ... ‘ 28 

62 Bauddha view refuted 28 

63 Vedanta view refuted 28 





Vll 


64 Yoga and Vaiscahika views criticised and the Sankhya view 

established ; the first argument in favour there of 

65 The second argument in favour of the effect being an entity 

66 third argument 

67 The fourth argument 

68 The fifth argument 

69 Proofs of the non-difference of cause and effect 

70 The effect only a particular development of the cause 

71 Difference of purpose and action no ground of difference 

72 Objection based on the naturci of the manifestation of the effect... 

73 Objection set .aside as being common to both theories 

74 Pi'odnction of the cloth not identical with the cloth 

75 Neeassity of causal operation 

76 Conclusion of the Karika ... 

KAlllKA X. 

77 Introduction to the consideration of the Manifosteti 

78 The Manifested-as having a cause ,,, 


79 

?? 

being non-eternal 

80 

?» 


non-pervading 

81 



active ... 

82 

n 

» 

multi-form 

83 

If 

V 

dependent 

84 

I? 

f> 

prctlicative 

85 

>t 

>? 

conjunct 

86 

rt 

tf 

subordinate 


87 The contrary nature of the Unmanifestod 

KARfkA XI. 


88 Introduction to Karika XI 37 

89 Similarities Ix^twcen tlie M.anifcsted and the Unmanifested — 

^ (i) having the three constituent attributes 37 

90 (ii) being indiscrirai native 37 

91 Objection based on the Bauddha idealism 38 

92 (iii) Insentient 36 

93 (iv) Productive 36 

94 Similarity with Nature stated 88 

96 Dissimilarity of these from Spirit 38 

96 Objection baseni on similarity of the Spirit with the Manifested ... 39 

KARIKA XII. 

• 

97 Introduction to the consideration of the Attributes 39 

98 Construction of the Karika .! 40 

99 Character of the Attributes as love, aversion and stupefaction ... 40 

100 The functions of the Attributes 40 

101 The method of operation of the attributes 42 





Vlll 


PAGB 


KARIKA XIII. 

« 

109 Introduction to Karlka XIII 

lOS Properties of ** Oooflness 

104 Necessity of the properties of “ Foulness ••• ... 

105 Necessity of the properties of “ Darkness •f» ••• **** *** 

105 Objeetion based on the impossibility of the co-operation of Attri- 
butes of contradictory properties 

107 Necessity of postulating the three Attributes 


49 

43 

43 

43 

43 

44 


KARIKA XIV. 


108 Question of the Indiscreetness and other properties of the Attri- 

butes ••• ••• ••• ••• 

109 Proof of the existence of such properties 

110 Question of the Existence of Nature 


45 

45 

45 


KARIKA XV. 

s. 

111 Why not accept the atomic theory ? 47 

112 Proofs of Nature’s Existence — (1) initial Separation and final re- 

union of cause and effect 48 

113 C^) — Because Evolution is due to Energy 49 

114 Objection : These two reasons might rest with Bnddhi. Reply : 

(3) from Finitcncss 50 

115 (4) Because of homogenity 50 


KARIKA XVI. 


116 Operation through the Attributes 51 

117 By a blinding of the Attributes 61 

tll8 Objection : How can an attribute of uniform nature produce 

diverse effects f Reply 51 


KARIKA XVII. 


119 Introduction to i;he Proofs of Spirit’s Existence 

120 Proofs (1) — Because all composite objects are for other’s purpose. 

121 Objection : and reply 

122 (2) Because there must be supervision 

123 (8) Because there must be one to feci ... 

124 A different interpretation of proof (3) 

125 (4) Because of the tendency of writers and sages towards Beatitude 


62 

52 

53 

54 

55 
55 
55 


KARIKA XVIII. 

126 Question of the •mniber of the Spirit raised 55 

127 (1) From allotment of brith, death and the orgaiiS 57 

128 (2) Since Activity is not Simultaneous 57 

121^ (3) Because the modifications of the Attributes are different ... 58 



PAGB. 


KABIKA XIX. 

• 

230 Introdaction to the consideration of Spirit’s Properties 5S 

131 Explanation of tho force of in the Karika 58 

133 Necessity of so many Properties ... ••• ... 58 

133 Ahs^ce of tl^e attributes leads to Emancipation ... ... 59 

134 Neutrality ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 59 

KARIKA XX. 

135 Objection — Intelligence and Activity always coexistent 59 

136 The feeling referred to by the objection must be a mistake ... 60 

• KARIRA XXI. 

137 Objection — what is the need of union ? 60 

138 Force of the Genetivc in “ Pradhanasya ” Explained 60 

139 The need of union explained 61 

140 The creation of Buddhi &c 61 

KARIKA XXn. 

141 The Process of Creation 61 

142 Process of the production of the Elements ... ... 63 

KARIKA XXIII. 

143 Introduction to the dehnition of Buddhi 63 

144 Definition of Buddhi explained * ... ••• ^ 

145 Properties of Buddhi — Virtue 63 

146 Pour kinds of Dispasaion 63 

147 Bight kinds of Power ... 64 

148 Reyerse of the above qualities 64 

KARIKA XXIV. 

149 Definition of Self-consciousness 66 

160 Direct effects of Slelf-conscionsness 66 

KARIKA XXV. 

161 Prsdnetion of Senses ... 65 

152 Objection : Purposelessness of JPassions and Reply thereto ••• 66 

• KABIKA XXVI. 

153 Seme defined ... ... ... 66 

B 



X 


KAKIKA XX VU. 


154 Doable nature of mind 

155 Mind defined ... 

156 Objection : Why. make mind a sense and Beply thereto 

157 Whence the mnltifarions effects from Egoism ? ... ^ ... 

158 Destiny also a modification of the Attributes .«« 

KARIKA XXVTII. 

169 Functions of the ten sense — organs 

KARIKA XXIX. 


160 Reflection of Manas, Sclf-consciousness of Ahankara and 

Determination of Buddbi 

161 The five vital Airs common to all 

KARIKA XXX. 

163 Function of the organs — (t) Instantaneous ... .'l. 

163 (2) Gradual • 

164 With regard to visible objects function of the internal or'* 

gons independent of the external ones 


KARIKA XXXI. 


165 Objection : Functions permanent or otherwise ? 

166 No collision of the functions of the organs 

167 Objection : How can insentient organs comprehend each others 

motives ?— Reply thereto 

KARIKA XXXII. 

<168 Division of the organs introduced 

169 The thirteen organs and their fuuctions 

170 Objects of these functions 

KARIKA XXXIII. 


171 

172 

173 

174 

176 


176 

177 

178 


Sub-divisions of the organa introduced ... 

The three external organs 

The ten external organs 

External organs operating at the present time, and the internal 

at all Times 

Time not a distinct principle.. 

KARIKA XXXIV. 


Objects of external organs introduced ••• ••• ••• 

Specific and gross objects of the functions of ifftcUectaal organs 
explained 


Do. do. orgsms of action ... 


PAOXL 


67 

67 

68 
68 
68 


69 


70 

70 


71 

71 

71 


71 

72 

72 


73 

73 

73 


74 

74 

74 

74 

75 


75 

75 

75 



KARIKA XXXV. 


179 The importance of the internal organs 

* KARIKA XXXVI. 

180 Predominaiicc of Baddhi * 

181 The external organs as affections of Attributes 

KARIKA XXXVII. 

182 Farther grounds for the Superiority of Buddhi ... 

183 Objection: absence of Mukti — Reply thei-cto 

• KARIKA XXXYIII. 

184 The Subtile character of the Tanmatras 

185 The gross Elements produced out of the Tanmatras 

186 These are«Specific because soothing terrific and deluding 

KARIKA XXIX. 

187 Three sorts of Specific Objects 

188 Subtile bodies are permanent ... ••• 

KARIKA XL. 

189 Astral body unooniined and permanent 

190 Objection : Two l>odics unnecessary, — and reply 

191 Question: How does the Astral Body migrate? Reply... 

192 Astral Body Dissolving at each ^ralaya 

I 

KARIKA XLI. 

193 Existence of the Astral Body proved 

KARIKA XLII. 

194 Reason and manner of the migration of the Astral Body 

195 Power of the Astral Body due to Nature 

KARIKA XLIIT. 

196 Incidental and Essential Dispositions 

197 ' Flesh, blood &c., related to the gross body 

KARIKA XLIV. 

198 Consequences of tae various means introduced 

199 Virtue leads to higher planes and vice to lower 

200 From the reverse, the reverse — the threefold bondage ... 



FACE. 


KABIKA XLV 


'201 Absorption into Pralmtl from Bispassion ••• 

202 Transmigration from Passionate attachment 

203 Kon-impediment from Power 

KARIKA XLVL 

204 Error, Disability, Contentment and Perfection ... 

205 Fifty Sub-divisions of „ „ 

KARIKA LXVn. 

206 The Fifty forms of Error 

KARIKA XLVIII. 

207 The Sub-divisions of Error &c. introduced 

208 Eight forms of Ignorance 

209 Eight forms of Egoism 

210 Ten forms of Attachment 

211 Eighteen forms of Jealonsly 

212 Eighteen forms of Abhinivesa 

218 The total coming to sixty-two 

KARIKA XLIX. 

214 The twenty-eight forms of Disability 

215 Eleven forms of disability, those of the sense organs 

216 The seventeen forms of disability of Buddhi 

KARIKA L. 


Nine forms of Contentment 

Four forms of internal Contentment 

(1) Ambha 

(2) Salila... 

(3) Ogha 

(4) Vrishti 

Five forms of external Contentment 

(1) P&ra 

(2) Supfi^ra 

(3) Pftrapftra 

(4) Annttamdmbha 

(6) Uttam&mbha 


KARIKA «LI. 


229 Forms of Power introdnoed 

230 The eight forms of Power 

281 (I) Xtor-Study 



232 

(2) Sntdra— Word 

... 

... 

96 

283 

(d)^T4r4tftra— Beasoning 

••• 

• IS 

95 

m 

(4) Bamyaka— Acquisition of Friends 

... 

ss. 

95 

235 

(5) Sftdamudita— Parity 

... 

... 

95 

236 

Ine three consequent on the suppression of three kinds of 

pain 

96 

237 

The first five forms otherwise explained 


••• 

96 

238 

Error &c. are hooks to the Powers 

KABIKA LII. 

... 

••* 

96 

239 

Necessity of the Linga (Intellectual creation) 

... 

••• 

97 

240 

Proofs of the above 



97 

241 

Objection of reciprocality let aside 

* KABIKA LIII. 

••• 


98 

242 

Forms of the intellectual creation introduced 

• •• 

••• 

98 

243 

The eight Divine sorts 



98 

244 

Five of the Lower Animals 

• •• 

••• 

98 

245 

Mankind single 

KABIKA LIV, 

• •• 

••• 

98 

240 

Threefoldness of the intellectual creation introduced 

• so 

••• 

99 

247 

Six Heavenly Begions 

KABIKA LV. 



99 

248 

Creation productive of pain 



99 

249 

ImiK)8ition of pleasure and pain on Spirit 

«*• 


100 

250 

Do. duo to Spirit's non-discrimination 

KABIKA LVI. 

• • • 

• 


100 

i 

251 

Question of the Maker of the Universe introduced ... 

«■• 

••• 

100 

262 

Creation due to Nature 

• t s 

• ss 

101 

253 

Creation for another's (Spirit’s) sake 

KABIKA LVII. 

••• 

• •• 

101 

264 

Objection — incapacity of insentient Nature of creation 

.*• 

• •• 

101 

255 

Beply — instance oi the flow of milk 

... 

... 

102 

256a 

View of a personal God overthrown 


... 

102 

256 

Freedom of the Sankhya theory from faults 

. KABIKA LVIII. 

f 

• •• 

• •• 

103 

267 

How for Spirit's purpose "?• Explained 

• ss 

••• 

108 


KABIKA nX. 

26^ « Whence the oeesation of the operations of Nature Explained! 108 



XIV 


259 

200 

261 


264 

266 

266 

267 

268 


270 

271 


272 

278 


274 


KARIKA LX. 

“ Nature acts for no compensation ”... 


PAGE 

104 


KARIKA LXI, 

No ^K^appcarancc of Nature with regard to an emancipated Spirit 104 
KARIKA LXII. 

Objection: emancipation and bondage not possible to unmodl- 


f jing Spirit 105 

Reply: “No Spirit is bound, nor migrates &c.” 105 

KARIKA LXin. 

“ Nature binds herself by seven forms &c.” 106 

KARIKA LXIV. 

** Truth ” explained ••• 107 

The purity of wisdom explained 107 


Objection based on the eternal tendency to false knowledge ... 107 

The form of discriminative knowledge 107 

“ Completion” of the knowledge 108 

KARIKA LXV. 

Cause of the cessation of Nature’s operation 108 

KARIKA LX VI, 

Objcctior “though one set of objects has been enjoyed, others 

remain to be enjoyed” 109 

Reply: “ The Sjiirit having attained to wisdom, there is no motive 
to further action ” 110 

KARIKA LXVII. 

Objection: The body dissolving on the attainment of wisdom, how 

could the bodiless Spirit behold Nature ? 110 

Body continues in obedience to the momentum imparted by previ- 
ous Karma ... ••• ••• 111 


KARIKA LXVIU, 

Final release of the Spirit 112 

KARIKA LXIX, 


275 The precedence of Kapila 


••• 


... 112 



XV 


KABIKA LXX. 

276 Impo«*tance of the Sankhya doctrine 

KARIKA LXXI. 

277 "Arya” cxplainod 


KARIKA LXXII. 


278 The Treatise is a whole, not a part 


PAOB. 

113 

.113 

113 



ERRATA. 


P. 26 Line ** unction ” (in rhetoric) read “taste* 

» « ji » >j ff »> 

Fi 66 to the left of line IS-^read “ (126),*’ 



INTRODUCTION. 


Thb ^cid writing of y&chaspati Misra does not stand in 
need of much in the shape of an lutrodnction. Bat nnder the 
cover of this title, I propose to* give a brief STUopsis of the 
cardinal doctrines of the S&nkhya Philosophy, in the hope 
that a reading of this remma would prepare the mind of the 
stndent for the reception of the abstruse truths, in which the 
Tattvakaumndi abounds. Any corrections or suggestions for 
alteration &c., will be most gratefully received. 

To begin with, the Sdnkhya lays down a fourfold division 
of categories based on their respective causal and productive 
efficiency. This division is into— (1) Productive— (2) Produc- 
tive and — Protluced — (3) Produced — (4) Neither Productive — 
nor — Produced. This classification includes all the twenty-five 
Principles — called Tattwas, — Prakriti or Nature being the 
productive, since the S&nkhyas allow of no other purely 
productive agency. The Productive — and — Produced are the 
other Principles — Bnddhi &c. These partake of the nature 
of both — ^thus Bnddhi is producti'oe in as much as out of it 
evolves Ahaukdira and it is produced in as much as it itself 
evolves out of Prakriti. The purely non-productive Princi- 
ples are the eleven sense-organs and the five efements. 
These are purely non-productive because none of these can 
^ive birth to a 'substance essentially different from them. 
The Purusha (Spirit) is neither productive nor produced. In 
fact it is without attributes. All accessories are the effects of 
the three Gunas, and the Spirit isby its very nature free from 
these and as such without any accessories. 

Having thus classified the various principles, we now turn 
lo the consideration of the various principles separately. 

First «f all then we must examine the nature of the all- 
’ powerful creative agent of the Bankhyas or, more properly, the 
creative force of the iJui verse. Then first of all — how is this * 
force constituted? It is naturally made up of the three 
0 



xviii 


Ganas — Sattwa, Bajas, and Tamas ; and iflien the PradhAna is 
in ita natural state, lying dormant, these three attributes are 
in an equilibrium. When occasion presents itself i. e. when the 
(iAdrishta of the soul acts upon the Fradhana, the equilibrium 
is disturbed, and it is this disturbance that gives rise to the 
various kinds of creations. The diversity of* created objects 
is thus rendered quite explicable. As already mentioned, all 
■accessories are due to the predominance of one or other 
pf the three Gunaa — ^the predominance of Sattwa giving rise 
to the kind of creation in which that attribute predominates, 
and so forth. Without proceeding any further, we must stop to 
nonsider the nature and properties and the Modm operandi 
'of these Gnnas. 

The three attributes — Sattwa, Rajas and Tatnas have re- 
spectively the character of Happiness, Unhappiness and Delu- 
sion; and have their operations characterised respectively by en- 
lightenment, activity and restraint ; and are so constituted that 
the one always operates in suppression of the other, and at the 
same time depending upon this latter. To explain this con- 
trariety of properties — The universe would be in an unceasing 
round of activity, if the only operating force were the Rajas ; 
'in order to provide against this. Nature provides herself with a 

• restraining agency in the shape of the Tamognna which by 
its nature is dull and passive. The natures of the different 
objects of the universe are thus ascertained in accordance with 
the excess of one or the other of these attributes. Again, if 
there were no enlightening agency in the shape of Sattwa, 
Nature would be nothing better than a mass of blind force 
acting in a haphazard manner. Thus we have established the 
necessity of the three Attributes. 

Here an objector comes forward and says — How can tha 
attributes, endowed as they are with mutually counteracting 
properties, cooperate and bring about such a grand and stupen- 
dous structure as our Universe ? The reply is that it is a very ' 

• common fact that two or more substances though mutually con- 
tradictory, do cooperate towards a single end — e. g. the wick 



, and tbe oil-^both taken separately are as mnch against the. 
action of one another as towards fire, but when they are together 
they help to brighten the fire. In the same manner^ 
thongh the Gunas are matoally counteractive, yet when com- 
bined, tfiey act towards a single end, supplying each other’s 
deficiencies. 

The necessity of postulating three different forces is further 
supported by another reason. We see that in nature there are 
three distinct properties — of pleasure, pain and dnlness. All 
other properties are reducible to these three heads. Again we' 
find that Jbhese are properties so much opposed to one another - 
that all could never be the effect of a single agency. Thus then 
we must postulate three different forces or constituent elements ' 
of Nature, to which severally we could trace the three 
distinct properties. To these three constituents of Nature we . 
give the names— Sattwa, Bajas and Tamas. We find in the . 
universe the above three properties, and as all the properties 
of the effect must be a direct resultant of a like property in its 
cause, so we at once arrive at the conclusion that the cause of 
the Universe — ^the Fradhitna — must be endowed with the 
three Attributes. 

So much for the action of the Gunas. We must now turn 
our attention towards the all-important Frakriti — the Key- 
stone of the Sankhya Fhilosophy. * 

What, then, is this Frakriti ? Does it stand for the Theistic 
God ? Or for the Banddha “ Sensations ” ? Or does it corres- 
pond to the Vedantic “Mayft” ? To all this we reply — ^It is 
all these, and It is neither of these. It resembles the Yedantic 
M&y&in asmnch as it is the one root of the Universe, which is 
asserted of Mdy& also thongh, as of an illnssory world. But 
llbe fact of its being the root of the Universe is akin to that (ff 
the Sankhya-Frakriti. It is not the God. Since it is said 
to be without intelligence, a mere dead Matter equipped * 

’ with certain potentialities due to the Gunas. In short, 
Frakriti is the one rohtless Root of the Universe (objective as 
well as subjective) — endowed with the three Gunas and evolvr 



XX 


ing through these, every hiad of existence-^^^ve of conrae, the . 
Parnsha — Spirit. 

The next point that we have to consider is — ^How do the 
Bankhyas prove the existence, the rootlessness, and e^ernality 
of this Frakriti ? Is it necessary to postulate snch a rootless 
root itself nnmanifested and yet manifesting all objective and 
subjective existence ? Proofs of this are given at length in 
all works on the Sankhya Philosophy, and it will not be al- 
together ont of place here to briefly snm them up. But 
before we take up this, it is necessary to explain the Sankhya 
doctrine of carnality., the point on which rests the whole fabric 
of Prakrit!. What then is the cause and how is it related to 
the effect ? Oanse is defined as a substance in which the 
effect subsists in a latent form. Thus then the effect most 
be said to be eternally existent— primarily in a latent con- 
‘ dition, in the cause, and latterly manifesting itself and then 
commonly recognized as the effect. How to prove that the 
effect has been lying latent in the cause and has not been 
newly produced by the cause ? 

Firstly . — What is nonentity can never be made an entity 
— ^That is to say — ^that which has never existed can never be 
brought into existence. What remains to be done by the 
operation of the cause is the manifestation of the effect — that is 
to say; its manifestation as the effect of the particular cause. 
And this kind of manifestation we find in the production of oil 
from the different oil-seeds wherein it has been hitherto 
lying latent. 

Secondly . — ^We always find that the effect is always in one 
way or the other related to the cause. Now, i^is relation 
would not be possible if the effect were a nonentity ; for 
certainly a nonentity can haver no relations. If the relation of 
the effect with the cause were not necessary then every 
effect would be possible from every cause. Since in that 
case there would be no restrictive qualification which would * 
confine the operation of particular* causes to particular 
effects. Thus then this would lead to an absurdity. 





Thirdly.-'-yn (samioi deny caasal efficiency. Now wbat 
does this efficiency consist in ? It cannot be anything other 
than the ‘existence in the cause of the effect in a latent 
conditio^. For the difference of seeds, as cause of oil, from 
sand, lies merely in the fact that it is only in the seeds and 
not in the sand,^that the oil snltsists. 

Fourthly . — ^the effect is non-different from the cause ; and 
the latter being a entity, the latter must be so also. To 
take an example, the cloth is non-different from the threads 
composing it. Because it is neither heavier than the latter, 
nor is any other relation than that of inherence possible 
between the two ; and it is only between two different things 
that any other relation as that of conjunction &c., is possible. 
Nor can the cipth ever exist apart from the threads. The 
difference of properties and actions cannot establish any 
difference. For though a single thread cannot do the action 
of cloth, yet this latter is nothing more than a collection 
of threads ; and we see that what a ' single man cannot do, 
can be done very well by a number of them together ; e.g. a 
single man cannot carry a palanquin, which work can be 
very well performed by a number of men together. Thus 
then we see that the effect is nothing more than the developed 
cause ; and the latter again is merely an undeveloped effect. 
This identity of cause and effect is declared by Sir William 
Hamilton also, who says — “ when we are aware of something 
which begins to be, we are by the necessity of our intelligence, 
constrained to believe that it has a cause. But what does 
the expression, thai it has a cause, signify ? If we analyse 
our thought, we shall find that it simply means, that as we 
cannot conceive any new existence to commence, therefore, 
9II that now is seen to arise under a new appearance had 
previously an existence under a prior form. We are utterly 
nnable to realise in thought the possibility of the complement 
* of existence either increased or diminished. We are unable 
on the one hand, to conceive nothing becoming something— 
or on the other something becoming nothing 



is thns conceived an absolnte tantology between the , 
^ect and its causes. We think the causes to contain all that, 
is contained in the effect ; the effect to contain nothing which 
was not contained in the causes.” 

— Lecturea on Metaphysiea — XXXIX. 

* f 

Having thns proved the existence of the effect in the 
cause, the S&nkhyas employ the fact in proving the 
existence of their Pradhana. The effect being only a develop- 
,ed cause, in which it has been lying latent, all existence 
must have its nnmanifested condition in its cause. That 
is to say, the elements lie in Self-Oonscionsness, which lies 
in BnddhL Now if we go on increasing the series we would 
be landed in a regreaaua ad infinitum. In order to avoid this 
we must postulate the existence of a principle which must 
be uncaused and which must be the final substrate of 
the undeveloped state of all other substances. Thns then 
we have a causeless cause which must be by its very nature 
nnmanifested, the final cause of all; — and to this the Sankhyas 
give the names “ Pradhana,” “Prakriti" or “ Avyakta.” 

Secondly we find that all the substances — ^from Bnddhi down- 
wards — are limited and are the development of some 
fhrther, ultimate Principle — &nd this is Pradhana. 

Having thus proved the Existence of Pradhana we must 
define its properties as well as those of its Effects ; and 
see wherein lies the difference. 

In order to do this we must first consider the properties 
of the Manifested Principles— the effects of Pradhana. 

. These are cauaed and as a necessary consequence of this — 
tranakory, limited, mobile, many, dependent (on the activity 
of the Pradhana), made up of parta', these are the characteris- 
tics where the Pradhana differs from the Manifested Principles, 
Buddhi and the rest. Foir, as already explained, the 
Pradhana is the uncauaed root of the Universe, and as such, 
must be eternal. And as all Universe is the result of Its 



xxiii* 


, evolntioD, It most be alUpermtUng ; as a necessary conse* 
qnencd of this it is immoveable i. e. Cannot wme, in the sense 
of going fh>m one place to another. And farther, since it is, 
all-pervading it mnst be one. It js independent— ‘ 
only on the activity of its own constitnent Ganas. 

These are the> points difference. Those of agreement are, 
that the Fradh&na as well as the manifested principles are the 
resnltants of the varions actions of the three Ganas. Second- 
ly, since without intelligence, both must be without discrimi- 
nation, since discrimination is the resalt of intelligence. 
Thirdly both these present objects for the enjoyment of the 
Spirit, t’ourthly since they are without intelligence, they can 
never be the observers, they mast always remain the observed,' 
and as sach common. This is technical and reqnires some 
explanation. Every object that is observed is so, not differently 
by different individuals, bat are common objects of observa-. 
tion for all, and are common in that sense. Fifthly they are 
without intelligence — the only Principle endowed with in- 
telligence being the Spirit. Sixthly they are prolific *. e. 
endowed with evolving energy. The Spirits are without this. 

These in brief, are the points of agreement and difference be- 
tween the Pradh&na on one hand and its effects on the other. 

Now we mnst consider the natiffe of the Spirits and see what 
the Sankhyas have to say as to their existence, nnmW and 
properties. But before we proceed with this, we mnst first 
seS if it is necessary to have a distinct principle in the shape 
oflnnnmerable Spirits. And on this score, the first reason that 
presents itself is the fact that we have not yet got any princi- 
ple that will supply the intelligence. For certainly Intelli- 
gence cannot belong to the Buddhi for it is material, being 
^e effect of Prakriti which is essentially non-intelligent, 
nnd what is absent in the cause cannot manifest itself in the 
effect. So we must have a distinct Principle of Intelligence. 

Secondly . — we see in our every day life that all that is 
corporeal is for the nse of another, as a bed, a chair &c. And 
we have seen before that all the principles from Prakriti 



•xxiv 


downwards are bodied. Though this sounds a little absurd as 
regards Frakriti, Buddhi and Ahanakra, yet we must not 
forget that the body of the apparently immaterial principles 
is made up of the three Gunaa-which are as material as any> 
thing. And such being the case, we must postdlate the 
existence of an unbodied or incorporeal principle. And this is 
Furusha, the Spirit, — and as we have not yet had an Intelligent 
principle, we attribute intelligence to this incorporeal Spirit. 
And. the Spirit must be unbodied because it is devoid of the 
three Attributes, for whatever is affected by the Gnnas is 
found to be bodied. 

Thirdly . — We have come across in daily life *with the 
general proposition that whatever is naturally connected with 
either pleasure, pain or delusion, is supervised over by some- 
thing, and we have also seen that all the principles from the 
Frakriti downwards are made up of the three Gnnas, and as 
such necessarily, affected by pleasure, pain or delusion ; and 
so these mnst have a supervisor. And in order to escape 
a regressm ad infinitum this supervisor mnst be himself un- 
touched by pleasure &c.; and as such must be something over 
and above Frakriti. And this is Furusha, the Spirit. 

Fourthly . — Frakriti and the rest are objects of enjoyment ; 
and as such they necessitate the existence of an enjoyer, 
who again must not be an object himself. And the enjoyer 
must be the intelligent principle. For a non*intelligent 
, principle being devoid of consciousness can never be the enjoyer. 
And this again mnst be something not made up of pleasure &e. 
Which can never be the case with Buddhi and the rest. These 
latter being made up as they are of pleasure, pain and delu- 
sion, cannot be the enjoyer of these ; for that will involve 
the absurdity of self-contradictory actions— one made up of 
pleasure, pain and delusion, cannot be only pleased or pained ; 
for each of these is contradictory to the one or oth^r phase 
of the constitution of Buddhi. And so we mnst have an* 
enjoyer over and above Frakriti and the rest. And this is 
Spirit. 



satv 


Pifthly and lastly.— k\\ systems of philosophy, and all the 
great men of the past we find striving after final Release. 
Now this is not possible of Prakriti or Bnddhi. For these 
latter a^e constitnently mode np of pain and as such can nevar 
be released from this. So the object of final Release mast be 
one who has neither pleasure nor pain nor delnsion for its con- 
stitnent element; and snch a principle is the Spirit alone. 

We have thns shown the necessity of postulating a distinot 
principle in the shape of Purnsha, over and above the Prakriti. 

The next thing, we have to consider is — What is this 
PurnshaT’ — How is it constituted ? — What are its properties ? 
— What its aim ? — and finally, how and when does it attain 
final Release ? We must take each of these questions one 
by one. • 

(1) What is Purnsha ? It is not the thinking principle, since 
thinking belongs to the mind. Nor ‘is it the determinning 
principle since that is alloted to Bnddhi. The character 
of the Spirit is a very unique one. It is none of these, ' 
still it is the necessary factor in all of these. It then is 
the principal agent of all functions, mental as well as 
organic. It is the agent who feels, thinks and wills. Without 
it no functions would be posifible, specially consciousness. 
In short Spirit is the source of intelligence, and as snch, the 
necessary factor in every function of the mind— 'feeling, 
ifitellecting and willing. 

(2) How is this Spirit constituted ? Asa matter of fact the 
Spirit is constituted of intelligence pure and simple, and 
is free from every other qualification and encumbrance. 

(3) What are its properties ? These are thns enunciated : 
it is free from the three attributes, possessed of discriminative,^ 
faculties, non-objective, singular, intelligent and non-produc- 

, tive. the Spirit were not naturally free from the action of 
the Attributes, no liberation ^om metempsychosis would be * 
possible. Since pain constitutes the very nature of the Attri> 

^ bates and as such can not possibly be separated from it. 



xxvi 


And thns no liberation being possible, there wonld be no 
necessity for enqniries to which the varions systems of 
philosophy are devoted. And again if the Spirit were not 
equipped with discriminative facnlties, it conld never attain to 
the discriminative wisdom arrived at by the philosophical 
systems, -which would thus become useless. 

Next as -to the aims of the Spirit. It has been laid down 
that the Spirit mistakes the fluctuations of the Attributes 
^ constituting Nature, to be His own; and thns comes to be 
aflccted by pleasure, pain &c., — which in reality do not affect 
him, — under the influence of the different kinds of delusions — 
the modifications of Bnddhi. Now the one all-absorbing aim 
of every Spirit is the attainment of wisdom that would help 
him to discriminate between Himself and the flnctnations of 
. the Attributes, and thns see the pleasure and pain caused by 
these in their true light and bo no longer affected by them. 

The next question that presents itself to ns is — ^how does 
Purnsha attain to this wisdom and thence to final emancipation? 
This wisdom arises from a constant study of the Sftnkhya 
philosophy, when the Attribute of Goodness is paramount in 
one’s constitution and the others have almost ceased to exist. 
The Purnsha tlien seesNaturettnd its constituents in their true 
light and finds out His mistake, and so shakes off all mistaken, 
preconceptions about self, and thus becomes free from the self, 
— imposed bonds of Bnddhi, and finally retries from metenf- 
psycosis and attains final Beatitude. 

Having thus said all that we had to say about Prakriti and 
Purnsha, we must look a little into the details of the process 
of creation. 

We have already said that Prakriti is the rootless Boot of 
the Universe. From this Prakriti emanates Bnddhi, to 
which the technical name of Maliat or the Great Principle is 
given. From this Buddlsi proceeds or the princi- 

ple of egoism. From this again emanate the eleven senses 
and the five subtle elements of sound, smell, taste, colour 



xxvii 


and touch. And from these latter five, proceed the five gross 
elements — Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Akasa. 

Let ns how examine the nature of these principles. First 
in the scale comes Buddld. This is defined as the principle 
of adhyams&ya. This term literally means “ ascertainment ” * 
and in explaining this term, the writers exemplify it as the 
determination that “ this is to be done by me.” It would thus 
appear that the functions of this principle are the same as 
those attributed by Western psychologists to will. But 
the Sankhya Buddhi is not mere will. It is Will and In- 
tellect combined. For in the opinion of the majority of 
WesteriT psychologists — specially of those belonging to the 
Kantian School — “ Intellect contemplates the circumstances . 
calling for action and provides the rule of conduct : Will 
controls the disposition in harmony with the dictator of in- 
telligence.” The Sankhyas attribute both these functions to 
their Buddhi. That Buddhi resembles will, is further 
made clearer by the proi)ertie8 assigned to it, by the Sankhyas. 
These properties are Virtue, Wisdom, Dispassion and Power. 
As we have said already will decides the course of action and 
as such the virtuousness or otherwise of actions must 
belong to this principle alone. Again we find that wisdom is 
described as both restrictive anA directive and so to attribute- 
the property of wisdom to Buddhi is to give it ’the dual 
character of Intellect and Will Dispassion and Power again 
must belong to the principle that decides on a certain course • 
of action and in this too we find Buddhi cognate with In- 
tellect and Will combined. 

The principle that we have to consider next is that of Egoism 
It is the principle to which all notions of the “ 1 ” are due. It 
corresponds with Kant’s ‘’’■apperception ” and Hamilton’s “self- 
consciousness ; ” that is to say the notion of self in every form 
of consoionsness: The idea that “ I have the consciousness,” 
“/ feel Ac.” As immediate effects of this principle of 
Egoism, we have the eleven sense-organs and the five 
subtle elements. The eleven sense-organs consist of the 



xxviii 


five intellecfcnal (subjective) senses — ^tbe eyes, the ear, the 
nose, the tongue, the skin,->and the five of action (objective) 
— the hands, the feet, speech, the excretory organ 
and that of generation. The eleventh sense is Manas, 
(mind). The five subtle elements are those of smeh, touch 
taste, colour and sound. From these latter again proceed the 
five gross elements — ^Earth, Air, Water, Fire and Akftsa ; and 
these have the subtle elements for their properties. Before 
proceeding any farther we must consider the natnre of the 
eleventh sense-organ, the mind or the refiective principle. 
Here first of all we must consider why we should call mind 
a sense at all ? The answer is not far to seek. The 
Sankhyas define tente as the immediate effect of the princi- 
ple of Egoism under the influence of the attribute of Goodness ; 
and this differentia we find in Manas as well as in the ten 
organs generally accepted as senses. Next let ns consider 
what are the functions of this eleventh sense ? Manas 
then is the only facnlty that partakes of the nature of both 
kinds of senses — the objective and the subjective. If it 
were not so, none of the senses would act, for it is only when 
these are influenced by the operation of the mind that 
they act towards their various objects. It would not be 
quite accurate to say tliat the senses do not act. Act they 
do, bnt these operations are not taken cognizance of by 
the agent, and as such having their actions purposeless, 
they may for all intents and pnrposes, be said to be with- 
out action. The function of this principle is technically 
called in Sankhya “reflection*' or “thinking.” This is 
further explained — when we first look upon an object the 
first impressions in connection therewith are all indefinite 
and without qualifications (Rrir9i<Pr). This indefinite and vague 
• impression is very soon rendered definite ; and this definitenee^ 
and the different qualifications are imparted to it by the 
reflection (or thinking) of the Mind. This process foilows so 
instantaneonsly that one can vscai'cely mark the process and ‘ 
thinks that the first impression he has had was all along de- 
finite, just as he latterly comes to perceive it. 



zxix 

It need not be repeated that the mnltifarionsness of creations 
is due to the diverse actions of the Attributes. 

The next question that is started is — whence proceeds the 
action o| the senses ? If their action were eternal then the 
creation would never cease. If not eternal, what is it that 
causes the operations to begin? TPhe reply given is that all these 
organs have a certain sort of anxiety for the fulfilment of each 
other’s actions ; and this anxiety leads to the action of each 
of them. There is no external impetus save that of the pur- 
pose— discriminative wisdom and hence emancipation — of the 
Pnrnsha. If there were no action of the different emanations 
from Prakriti, the Spirit would be at a loss to discriminate 
between itself and the inanimate Prakriti. So we see that 
the only impetus from without is supplied to the senses by the 
purpose of the ISpirit, and thenceforward they are led on in 
their active path by their own anxiety. 

Altogether then we see that there are thirteen organs — 
three internal, Bnddhi, Ahankftra and Manas, and the ten 
external — the ten sense-organs. Of these the latter operate 
only in the present time, whereas the former act with regard 
to the past, present and future. Of the external organs, the 
five subjective senses operate towards subtle as well as gross 

substances, whereas the objective^nes only towards gross ones. 

■» 

Of the thirteen organs, the palm of supremacy is given 
to the internal ones, since these are applicable to all kinds of , 
substances ; and another cause of supremacy we have already 
noted — vtjg., the one with regard to time. Of these internal 
organs again, the Buddhi is supreme, since the principles of. 
Egoism and Eefiection operate towards their objects and then 
present these experiences to the Bnddhi, which finally presents 
:bkemwith its own additions and alterations to the discriminat- 
ing eye of the Spirit. Thus we find that Bnddhi is the chief 
agent ofHhe Spirit and brings about all his worldly enjoyment, 

* finally leading to His discrimination of self from tbe emana- 
tions of Prakriti, and thence to final liberation. Thus of all the 
organs, Bnddhi is supreme. 



zxx 


Having thas described the organs, we tnrn our attention 
towards the gross substances. These are of three kinds — * 
Subtle, Parent-born and the Great Elements. Of these the 
first is eternal, and the second and third fading and transient. 

This “subtle body” of the Sankhyas resembles to* a great 
extent, I believe, the “Astral* Body” of Theosophical litera- 
ture. It is born before the visible body and lasts till the 
Pralaya ; and till then it presents the astral body of the 
Ego in all its reincarnations during that Ealpa. If this 
were not so, the actions of one incarnation could not act upon 
the Spirit in the next, for the Spirit itself cannot be affected 
by either good or evil, and as such could not be affected by 
the actions of one incarnation in another. For the actions 
were done by the body and the organs of the former incarna- 
tion ; and these dying with the Body, wherfein would the 
traces of the former actions be left ? So we must postulate 
the existence of a substrate in the form of the “Linga-Sarira,” 
equipped with subtile counterparts of all the sensory and 
motor organs. And thus then we shall have the Linga-Sarira 
imprinted with all the effects of the actions of one birth. And 
since this body follows the Spirit in all its subsequent in- 
carnations, it is but natural that the fruits of past actions 
should affect the Spirit ; — ^though the Spirit cannot be affected, 
yetsolcAigas he has not attained to discriminative wisdom, he 
thinks all the affections of Bnddhi to be his own. The Linga- 
Sarira thus must have traces of virtue and vice on itself so 
as to bring out their effects in a future incarnation. This 
Linga-Sarira again is the substrate of the different organs 
which are subtile in their nature, and as such could not subsist 
without a substratum. 

Let ns now see how the Sankhyas treat of the idea of means 
and consequences of actions. By means of virtue the Spirit 
ascends to higher regions. By “ higher regions ” liere is of 
course meant a more highly spiritual life. Vice leads • 
the other way. Emancipation results from discriminative 
wisdom. This wisdom consists of deep insight into the 



xxxi 


character of the Spirit and Natnre, and conseqnent intelligent 
perception of the difference between the two—from which 
results the Spirit’s perception of His own true natnre, which is 
above the operation of the three Attributes, though so long 
He has been labouring under the self-imposed imaginary thral- 
dom of the Attributes. No socfner has this perception been 
gained than the Spirit casts off His self-imposed chains and be- 
comes free of the Attributes, and thereby attains to His proper 
state, which is one of pure nninternpted and nnmixed intelli- 
gence. By mere dispassion is gained a state of absorption into 
the subtler elements of Natnre. A Spirit thus transformed 
enjoys for a time a state of unintelligent rest, and is born^ 
again under the same restrictions and with the same bondage' 
as before the absorption. If on the other hand, the Spirit is 
under the influence of attachments proceeding from the attri- 
bute of Passion, then it is that it falls into the stingy darkness- 
of metempsychosis from which it can be freed only by the divintf 
ray of wisdom. We are all labouring under this category. 

The Sankhyas have further entered into a very elaborate 
enunciation of the various manifestations of Bnddhi dividing 
them into no less than flfty forms. These are made up of 
five kinds of obstruction, twenty-eight of incapacity ( result- 
ing from the disability of the organs), nine of contentment and 
eight of perfection. Of these, again there are 62 forms of 
obstruction alone. 

So much for intellectual creation. The elemental or 
material creation comprises the eight kinds of divine celestial 
beings, the five of the lower animals, and one, the human 
kind. The various grades of creation are attributed to the 
excess or otherwise of one of the attributes. Thus the attribute 
ot Goodness predominates among the gods, that of Passion - 
among men, and that of Darkness in all lower creation. 

All this elaborate process of creation is begun by Natnre 
solely for the sake of the Spirit’s emancipation from the miseries ' 
of metempsychosis — ^miseries inevitable to Him when boro in a 



zzxii 


hnman body. Nature is described as a great benefactress, not^. 
cibriag for any return of services from the Spirit, and working 
ibr emancipation ont of her own sweet will, till He 
comes to perceive her true character ; when She^ retries 
from the scene like an actress who has played her part, and 
never again returns to the same Spirit, the spectatcr. Thus 
then in reality all bonds and pains are only supposed by the 
Spirit to be His own. By His very nature He is free from all 
internal fluctuations, in as much as He is above the Attributes, 
whose edbct these fluctuations are. After the attainment of 
discriminative wisdom, the Spirit steers clear of all notions of 
egoism, and attains to His own natural spiritnal condition. 
But the body continues for a time on account of the impulse 
previously imparted to it. And the attainment of wisdom 
having put a stop to the operation of all %nch agents as 
virtue Ac.— "the operation of which is a necessary cause of 
rebirth — the body fells, and the Spirit regains His true 
character, and attains to absolute and eternal beatitude, 
never to return to the cycles of metempsychosis. 



THE TATTWA-KAUMUDt. 

[SAnkhya], 


AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 


(1)- Kbvebencb to the One Unhorn, Red, White and 
Black, producing maivy children; and also to the Unborn 
Ones Who have recourse to Her, and renounce Her on having 
enjoyed the pleasures afforded by Her. 


To the Great Bishi Kapila, and his disciple Asnri, as also 
to Panchasikha and Iswara-Krishna, — to these we bow in 
reverence. 

(S). In this world, that expounder is listened to by the 
audience, who offers expositions of facts 
whose knowledge is desired by them. Those, 
on the other hand, who expound undesired 
doctrines, are given up by them, as mad men, or as men 
unacquainted with science and custom. And that science is 
desirable which being known, leads to the attainment of the 
final end of man. Consequently, as the science to be (here- 
after) explained supplies the means to the final goal, therefore, 
the author introduces the desirability of the subject-matter : — 

KIrikA I. 

There being (in this world) an impediment caused by 
the three kinds of pain, (there arises) a desire for 
enquiry into the means of alleviating them. And if 
(it be urged that) the enquiry is superfluous on account 



[ 3 ~ 4 ] 


2 


[KABIKi I.] 


of (the existence of) obvious means, — (we reply that* 
it is) not so : because these (latter) are neither absolute 
nor final. 

# 

(3) . The subject-matter of science would not be enquired 

into — (1) if* there existed* no pain in this 
^ "w^orld ; or (2) if though extant, its removal 
were not desired ; or (3) even if desired, its 
removal were impossible, — snch impossibility arising either 
from the eternal character of the pain, or from ignorance of 
the means of alleviating it ; or (4) notwithstanding jthe pos- 
sibility of removing it, if the snbject-matter of science did not 
afford the adequate means ; or (5) lastly, if there were other 
and easier means elsewhere available. 

(4) * Now, that there is no pain and that its removal is 

not universally desired, are opposed to facts. 
With this view, it is declared: There 
being an impediment caused by the three 
kinds of pain.^^ The three kinds of pain constitute (what is 
ordinarily called) the ‘‘ triad of pain.’’ And these are: (1) 
The natnro-intrinsic (Adkydtmiha)^ (2) The natnro-extrinsic 
(Adhibhautika\ and (3) The super-natural {Adhidaivika). Of 
WxQseihQnaturo-intrinsic is two-fold, bodily tiudmental. Bodily 
pain is caused by the disorder of the various humours, wind, 
bile, and phlegm ; VixA mental pain is due to desire, wrath, 
avarice, affection, fear, envy, grief, and the non-preception 
of particular objects. All these are called intrinsic on ac- 
count of their admitting of internal remedies. Pains submit- 
ting to external remedies are two-fold : extrinsic^ and super-- 
human. The extrinsic are caused by men, beasts, birds, rep- 
tiles and inanimate things ; and the superhuman owe their 
existence to the evil influence of planets and the various 
class of elementals. Thus the fact that pain, — a specific 
modification of the attribute of I'oulness^ (Rajas) — ^is experi- 
enced by each soul, cannot be gainsaid. “ Impediment ” 
(^Abkighata) is the connection of the sentient faculty with the 



3 


[k. I.] 


[ 5 ]- 

/5onsciouffness of disagreeableness caused by the three kinds of 
pain residing in the internal organs. Thus then this idea 
of disagreeableness constitutes the cause of the desire for the 
alleviation of pain. . Though pain cannot be absolutely 
prevented, yet it is possible to alleviate it — as will be explained 
subsequently, l^ms it is concluded that (enquirey is going 
to be made) “ into the means of alleviating it ” (the three 
kinds of pain). In “ "Tadapaghatake the particle refers to 
the three kinds of pain ; and though this forms the subordi- 
nate factor in the preceding compound, yet it is mentally the 
more proximate (and hence the following pronoun refers to 
it in preference to the other and primary factor of the 
compound). The means of alleviation, too, are only those 
derivable from science, — and none other- 

( 6 ). Objection: ‘‘ On account of obvious remedies^ suck 
enquiry is superfluous.^^ That is to say : 

0l^e€ti4)n\ Inquiry wc grant the existence of the triad 
obvious of pain, and also the desirability of its 
Means. removal, as also the possibility thereof ; 

we go farther, and grant that the means 
derivable from the Sastras are adequate to the removal. 
With all this, however, the present enquiry becomes super- 
flnons ; because we have easier ^bvious means for the removal 
of pain, and further because of the difficult character of the 
means prescribed in the Sdstra — a full knowledge of abstruse 
philosophical principles, attainable only by a long course of 
traditional study extending over many lives. Says a popular 
maxim : ‘ When a man can find honey in the house, wherefore 
should he go to the mountains ? So, when the object of desire 
has been attained, which wise man will make any further 
attempts ?’• Hundreds of easy remedies for bodily pain are 
^id down by eminent physicians ; for the mental pains also 
we have easy remedies in the shape of the attainment of the 
objects of enjoyment — such as women, desirable food and drink, 
dress and the like. Similarly of the extrinsic pains we have 
easy remedies — such as acquaintance with moral and 2>olitical 


* Vide the Nydya4atikd^ in, loco. 



[ 6 - 8 ] 


4 


[k; I.] 


science, residence in safe places, &c. In the same manner, of,. 
snperhnman troubles we have remedies in the shape of gems 
and charms, &c. 


(0). Reply : 'Sot so I Became these are neither absolute 

Ttepiy Obvious final'’ Absoluteness (of the means) 

means are not abso- consists in the certainty of its effect; and its 
lute or final. finality consists in the non-recurrence of the 

pain once removed. The absence of these two properties is de- 
noted by the expression '■‘^Ekantatyantohhavah. " The universal 
affix tasi has a genitive force here. The upshot of the whole 
is this : On account of not observing the unfailing cui?e of the 
different kinds of pain, even on the employment in the pre- 
scribed manner of medicines, &c., mentioned before, — we 
predicate the want of certainty ofthe cure effected thereby ; and 
similarly from the recurrence of the pain once cured, we infer 
non-permanence of the cure. Thus, though easily available, 
the obvious means do not effect absolute and final removal 
of pain. Consequently, the present enquiry is not super- 
fluous. 


(7). Though the mention of the word pain in the very 
beginning is inauspicious, yet that of the 
th^teginning^rd* cxtirpatory means as leading to its removal 
■ is auspicious; and as such quite appro- 

priate at the commencement of a treatise. 


(8). Objection : We grant the inadequacy of obvious 
means ; but we have others prescribed in the 
Ohjeetixm : Vedic Vedas — such as Jyotishtoma, &c. — which 

means adequate to,,„ 

removal of jaiu. I**'®*' a thousand years — a whole host of 
these forming the Ritualistic portion of the 
Vedas. And these means verily will remove the triad of pain 
absolutely and finally. Declares the S'ruti : “Desiring Heaven 
one must perform sacrifices and Heaven is thus described in 

the BhattavoLrtika : “ Pleasure, unraixed and uninterspersed 
with pain, and attainable by pure longing for it, is what is 



[ 9 ] 


5 


[K. H.]; 


• expressed by the word Heaven.'* Heaven thus consists iit 
pleasure, diametrically opposed to pain, which by its very 
existence extirpates all kinds of pain ; nor is this pleasure 
short-liyed, — ^for, declares the S'ruti : “We drank the Soma- 
and became immortal” \_Atharvasiras III], Aud if the celestial 
pleasure were short-lived, how* could there be ‘ immortality ’?' 
Hence the Vedic means for the removal of pain, which can be 
gone through in a moment, a few liours, a day, a month, or a. 
year, — are easier than discriminative knowledge, which can 
be attained only hy a long course of traditional study extend- 
ing over many lives. Thus then the proposed enquiry again 
becomes supertluous. 

Reply : 

, KabjkA IL 

The revealed is like the obvious ; since it is connect- 
ed with impurity, decay aud excess. A method con- 
trary to both is preferable, — consisting in descrimina- 
tive knowledge of the Manifested, the Uumanifested, 
and the Knowing (Spirit).* 

(9). Aiiusrava" is that which is heard during the 
tutorial lectures of a qualified teacher, — and 
is ^ the Jwious'^'° (written). Anuiravika = relating to 

^ Anusrava or Veda, that which is known 

therefrom. The list of religious rites laid down in the Vedas 
is equal to the obvious (means, mentioned before) ; — both being 
equally inefiicieut in the absolute aud final removal of the 
triad of pain. Though the text uses the generic term “ Vedic” 
(“ Anusramka ”), yet it ought to be taken as implying only 
4he ritualistic portion of it ; because descriminative knowledge 
also forms part of the Veda (which of course is not what the 
author tneans). Says the S'ruti : “ The Sjnrit ought to be 


* Tliis Kdrikii embodies, *as Davies rightly remarks, the leading principle 
of Kapila’s philosophy, according to which final emancipation is attainable not 
by religious rites, but by descriminative knowledge as explained by Kapila. 



[ 10 — 11 ] 


6 


[k. li,] 


known and descriminated firom Primordial Matter” ( 
ranyaka 2-4-5); (by so doing) “the agent does not retnrn, yea he 
does not return (into this world)” (Ckh&vdogaya 8-16). 

(10) . Beason for the above assertion is given; '■'•since it is 

Becanse impure connected with impurity, decay and excess^ 
drying and exces- The impurity lies in the fact of the Soma- 
sacrifice, &c., being accompanied by animal- 
slaughter, and the like. Says the revered Panchasikh&ch&rya: 
“It (the sin attendant upon slaughtei') is slightly mixed, 
destructible and bearable.” The ‘ slight mixture ’ is that of 
the principal effect (Apurva, i.e. merit) of the Jyofisktoma, 
^c., with the minor apurva, the cause of evil, due to 
animal-slaughter. The epithet ' destructible' implies that 
the sin is removeable by certain expiatory rites'; but if some 
how, these are neglected, then at the time of the fructifica- 
tion of the principal Karma (merit), the evil element (demerit, 
caused by the slaughter) also bears its fruits ; and as long 
as these latter are being experienced, they are borne with 
patience ; hence the epithet ‘ hearable' Experts (in rituals) 
dangling in the nectar- tanks of Heaven attained to by a 
host of virtuous deeds, have to bear the spark of the fire of 
pain brought about by the clejnent of evil (in the rituals). 

« 

(11) . It cannot be urged that the generic law — “Kill not 

The impurity animal,” is set aside by the specific 

of ajiimai-siaughter in one, “ Kill the animal for the Agnishtoma ” 
a sacrifice, (istabliBlicti. _ ,, , , i t . i 

— because they do not contradict each 
other ; and it is only when two laws are mutually con- 
tradictory, that the stronger sets aside the weaker. In the pre- 
sent instance, however, there is no contradiction, the two laws 
treating of two entirely different subjects. For the negative 
law “Kill not, &c.,” only declares the capability of the slaugh- 
ter to produce evil, and hence pain; but it does not do away 
with the fact of its being necessary for the completion of the 
sacrifice ; and in the same manner, the following injunction 
“ Kill the animal, &c.,” declares the necessity of animal- 



[12-14] 


7 


[k, n.] 


slaughter in the sacrifice, bat does not negative the fact of its 
being productive of sin. Nor is there any contradiction between 
the productivity ofsinand the capability of helping the comple- 
tion of «. sacrifice. Animal-slaughter can produce sin in the 
man, and at the same time, quite consistently help a sacrifice. 

(13). The properties — df^cay ( noU’-permanence ) and 

excess — belong really to the effect ; bat are 
Non-perman- here attributed to the means. This 

QI1C6 ftud CXCGSiS 

shown to apply to permanence is inferred from the fact of 
the results of Vetiic Heaven being caused entity. Further, 
Jyotishtoma^ &c., are the means to the 
attainment of Heaven only, whereas the Vdjapeya^ &c., 
lead to the attainment of the kingdom of Heaven. This is 
what constitnles the ‘^excess*^ spoken of. The greatness of 
one’s magnificence is a source of pain to another of lesser 
magnificence, 

(13). In the passage “ Drinking Soma, we became im- 
mortal” — immortality implies long-durabi- 
as^riSuit of Vedic I'ty,— as is declared elswhere : “Immortality 
action u only long- is durability till the final dissolution of all 
durability. elemental (ot finite) existence.” Hence 

the S'rutii “ Neither by deeds, nor by children, nor by wealth, 
but by renunciation alone they got immortality” \M(iha- 
nUrdyana Upanishad X. — 5] ; and again “ Swargsi shines in a 
secluded valley at a distance, which the ascetics alone 
enter. By actions did the a.scetics with children, desiring 
wealth, get death. Therefore those other learned Rishis, who 
were above all action, got immortality.” 

• (14). With all this in view, it is declared: “ A method 
, contrary to both is preferable — consisting in 

deJ c r i v e descriminaUve knowledge of the Manifested, 

wisdom. the' Unmanifested, and the Knowing T , 

Tasm&t refers to the Vedic means of 
removing pain. A method, — contrary to the impure Soma- 



[ 15 — 16 ] 


8 


[k. ii.J 


sacrifice, &c., bringing about excessive and short-lived results, 
— is pure, nnmixed with evils due to animal-slanghter, 

and leads to results non-excessive and everlastfng, as is 
clear from the Sruti precluding all return to metei^pycho- 
sis for people possessing descriminative knowledge. The 
argument based on the said result being a caused entity cannot 
be urged as a ground for its non-permanence ; because this holds 
only in the case of the effect being an entity ; in the present 
case, however, the consequence — the removal of pain — is a 
negation, a non-entity. And such negation putting an end to 
causal efficiency, there can be no further effect, in the shape 
of more pain. For it is a fact admitted on all hands that 
the causal activity lasts only till the attainment of descri- 
minative knowledge. This will be explained later on. (K&ri- 
ka LXVI.) 

(16). The literal meaning of the Karikd^ however, is this : 

The means of removing pain, consisting in 
descriminative knowledge of the Spirit, 
as apart from Matter, is different from the 
scriptural means, and hence is preferable. The Scriptural 
is good inasmuch as it is authorised by the Veda and as such 
capable of removing pain to a certain extent. The descri- 
minative knowledge of the Spirit as distinct from Matter is 
also good. Of these two, the latter is superior. 

(16), Question : “Whence does such descriminative know- 
ledge iirise'^? Answer: ^^From descriminatim 

mi^^ative n^o^w- knowledge of the Manifested^ the Unmani** 
ledge. fested^ and the Knowing Knowledge of 

the Manifested precedes that of its cause, 
the Unmanifested ; and from the fact of both of these (Mani- 
fested and Unmanifested) being for another’s purpose, we infe/ 
the existence of the Spirit. Thus then we find that these 
three are mentioned in the order of precedence of tlie know- 
ledge thereof. The upshot of the whole then is this : The 
knowledge of the distinction of Spirit from Matter arises 
from descriminative knowledge— consisting in meditation 



[17—19] 


9 


[k. m.] 


^and contemplation uninterrnptedly and patiently practised 
for a long time, of the Manifested, <fec., previously heard of in 
the Smti "and Purdnas, and then established by scientidc 
reasoning. This will be explained in detail in K&rildt LXIY. 


(17). Having thus decided Philosophy to be needful for 
Four-foiddivisionof enquirer, the author, with a view to 
categories. commence the work, sets down, in brief, the 

import of the system, in order to concentrate the attention 
of the eriqnirer. 

KAmkA III. 

“ Nature or Primordial Matter, the root of all, is 
not produced; the Gireat Principle ( Mahat, i. e., Budd]^) 
and the rest are seven, being both producer and pro- 
duced ; sixteen are the produced ; and the Spirit is 
neither the producer nor the produced.” 

Briefly, the objects treated of in the system are four-fold. 
Some of them are merely productive, some merely products, 
others both productive and proddets, and others, neither ike 
one nor the other. 

• (18). It being asked — ^What is the productive ? The answer 
is — Nature or Primordial Matter is the root 
The Productive. ^ uiverse, an aggregate of effects ; of 

Matter itself there is no root, or else we would be lauded in 
an unwarranted regressus ad infinitum. 

• (19). How many are the objects that are both productive 
and products, and which are these ? The 
answer is— The Great Principle and the 
rest are both. As the Great Principle 
(Buddhi) being the cause of Self-consciousness (Afaaukara) 
is the effect of Nature ( Prakriti ), so is Self-consciousness 



[ 20 — 22 ] 


10 


[k. m.] 


the cause of the five subtle Primary Elements (Tanmatras) 
together with the eleven sense-organs, and at the same time, 
the effect of the Great Principle ; ^and so are the five subtle 
Primary Elements the cause of the grosser elements, Vril* 
(Akdsa) and the rest, and at the same time, the effect' of Self- 
consciousness. 


( 20 ). 


The Products. 


How many are the productions, pure and simple, and 
what are they ? It is said — “ The produ- 
ctions are sixteen ” — i. e., the five gross 
elements (earth, &c.) and the eleven sense-organs, — these are 
mere products or modifications not pro<lnctive. Though cow, 
pot, trees, <&c., are modifications of earth, and so are curd and 
sprout, of milk and seed respectively, yet these facts do not 
touch our position ; since trees, &c., do not differ from earth, 
in their essence, and it is the productiveness of something 
different in essence, for which the term '•PrakritV stands ; and 
further, cows, trees, &c., do not differ from each other in their 
essence, since they have, in common, the properties, grossness 
and perceptibility. 

(21). The form of that which is neither productive nor pro- 
duct, is now stated. “ The spirit is neither 
a product nor productive” All this will 
be exjffained later on. 


(22). In order to prove the above statements, the different 
kinds of proof ought to be noticed. Nor 
Three kinds of proofs, ^an there be a specific definition without a 

general one. Hence the definition of proof in general follows. 


• Though this translation of the word Akasa is sure to jar upon European 
ears, as borrowed from a work on fiction (Lytton’s “ The Coming Peace”), yet 
I have put it in, since I could not find any other word in the English language 
expressive enough to denote all that is connoted by the Sanskrit word Akfisa. 

Inane,” “ Astral Light,” “ Ether,” “ Space,” &c., do not sufficiently represent 
the active character of the Sanskrit Akdsa, 



[83-25] 


11 


[k. IV.J 


KIeikA IV. 

Perce'ption, Inference, and Valid Testimony are 
admitted to be the three kinds of proof necessary ; 
because they include all kinds of proof. It is by proof 
that a fact is ascertained.” 

(53) . Here, first of all, we have to explain the word Pramdnay 

which explanation would form its definition. 

Proof defined. Proof, then, is defined as that by which 

right notion is determined ; it thus becomes 
the canse or means of all correct cognition. This definite 
right notion is a mental condition free from the contact of all 
that is cither doubtful, self-contradictory or unknown ; this 
comprehension too belongs to the human agent, and the result 
thereof is right notion; and that which leads to such right 
notion is Proof. Thus the term Proof is differentiated from 
all that leads to wrong notion, viz.y doubt, misconception, 
memory, and the like. 

(54) . The author now rejects the different views with regard 

to the number of proofs : “ Of three Icindsy ” 

The thrce-foldness — jg — of ’proof there are three kinds, 

of proof. ^ mi • • 11 

neither more nor less. This we shall 
eiyilain in detail after the specific definitions of the particular 
kinds of proofs. 

(26)- Now, it is asked, which are the three kinds of proof ? 

The answer is — “ Perception, Inference, and 
of ^J^*^**^ *^'”*^* Valid Testimony. The above is an ex- 
» position of what is popularly known as 

proof; and a philosophical system is expounded for the 
people, eflnce thereto is its province confined. The cognitions 
*bf the great sages, though realities, do not, in any way, help 
those of the ordinary people, and as such are not treated of 
here. 



[ 26 - 29 ] 


12 


[k: V.] 


(26). Ol^eetion. — We grant that the nnmher of proofs is 

The inclusion «f therefore should 

all other pToofe in the it not he more than three? The different 
above-mentioned. schools do lay down others, as Analogy 

(Upam^lna), &c. Reply — “ Since these three include all kinds 
of proof” This will be farther explained later on. 


(27). Now an altogether different question is raised — Why 
Necessity of en- Should the philosophic system enquire into 
quiry into the differ- the natnre and kinds of proof, when it is 
ent kinds of proof. launched forth with the express purpose 

of explaining the Pramh/a, i. e., the subject-matter^ of proof 
(i. e., correct cognition) ? To this it is replied — *'• Since a fact 
is ascertained only by proof sP 

determination or ascertainment.] 


The oirier of Bx- (28). The explanation of the Kfi.rik& 
planation. follows the sense, not the order of the words. 


(29). Now on the occasion of the definition of the special 
The specific de- proofs, the author of the Kilrik^, 

finitions of the first of all, defines Perception, since it 
precedes 'all other Proofs, Inference, &c., 
which,' therefore, are dependent upon it ; and farther since 
there are no two opinions with regard to it. 

, KAbikA V. 

“ ‘Perception* is definite sense-cognition (t. cogni- 
tion of particular objects through the senses) ; ‘ Infer- 
ence ’ is declared to be three- fold, and it is preceded 
by (based upon) the knowledge of the major premiss 
[asserting the invariable concomitance of the Linga 
(the Hetu, i. e., the characteristic mark, the middle' 
term,) with the Lingi (the Vyfipakft or the S&dhya, i. e., 
the major term, in which the characteristic inheres] and 



[30-^31] 


13 


[k. V.]' 


^the minor premiss [asserting the existence of the 
characteristic in the Paksha, or the minor term] ; and 
* Valid Testimony ’ is true revelation (S'ruti).” 

The mention of “ Perception ” is only the statement of the 
term to be defined ; the remainder being the definition^ by 
which word is meant the differentiation (of the term defined) 
from things of the same class or species, as well as from 
those of other classes. 

(30). The literal meaning (of the definition of Perception) 

“Perception” cle- thus broken Up; objects {\ ish.Q/ycL^ 

fined the definite are those that bind or connect the subject 

cognition of parti- r -v -xt jt • ^ 

cniar objects obtain- yyishayt) With their own forms, i, they 

eci through thesenscs. subject; snch are earth, 

pleasure, &c., belonging to us. The subtle Primary Elements 
are no objects (of sense) to us, though they are so to Yoffis 
and the Gods. ‘ Prativishaya ’ is that which is applied to 
diflFerent objects, i. e., the organs of sense. Application here is 
close proximity, or direct communication, — Prativis/taya, thna 
meaning, the sense-organ applied to, or in communication 
with, the object (perceived) ; and the definite cognition based 
on this (proximity) is PrativiskayMhyamsdyah’' This 
cognition or knowkdge, which is the resalt of an exercise of the 
Intellectual Faculty (Jiuddhi), is defined as consisting 'in the 
preponderance therein, of the attribute of Goodness — following 
oil the subjugation of that of Darkness — resulting from the 
proximity of the sense-organs to the objects of perception. 
This proximate existence (Vritti) is also called cognition. 
This is a Proof ; and right notion results from the apprehen- 
sions of the sentient faculty by means thereof. 

<k (3l)» Intellect (Bnddhi), being a modification of, orema- 
nation from. Nature (Prakriti, Primordial 
, Matter), is insentient ; and so, therefore, 

therefleetiott of are its cognitions, jar, &c. And similarly 
the difterent modifications or productions 
of the Intellect — pleasures, Ac., are insentient. The Spirit 



[32—33] 


14 


[K. V.] 


(Parnsha), however, having no real relation with these; 
pleasures, &c., is sentient. This Spirit, being reflected in the 
Intellect, appears to be actually affected by the cognitions 
and pleasures, &c., really belonging to the Intellect — which 
latter, therefore, are said to favour an intelligent entity, the 
Spirit. Through this reflection in the intelligence of the 
Spirit, the non-intelligent Buddbi and its cognitions appear 
endued with intelligence. This will be further explained in 
K4rika XX. 


(32)« Iq the definition, the mention of ‘ definite cognition* 

The above defini- aside all doubtful knowledge,' because 

tion diflerentiates the latter^ is not definitely comprehended 
Perception from all , i • , . -r. 

other forms of cog- or well-defined, and hence IS uncertain. By 
*"**°“' saying “ objects,” their contraries, all non- 

entities, are excluded; as by saying '• prati' — and thereby 
implying proximity of the sense-organs to the objects — are 
excluded “ Inference,” and “ Trustworthy Assertion.” Thus 
‘ the definite cognition of particular objects ’ is a complete 
definition of Perception, since it serves to distinguish it from 
all other things of the same, as well as of different classes 
The definition of “ Perception ” given by other philosophical 
systems are neither impugned nor defended, for fear of being 
too prolix. 


(33). How can one, denying Inference as a proof, — viz., tlie 
Inference v> esta- Materialist — be certain of the ignorance. 
Wished as a distinct doubt or erroneousness of another man ? 
**'^°“** Since, these — ignorance, &c. — are not per- 

ceptible to our mortal eyes ; nor can any other method of 
proof be applied to this case, since no other (than Perception) 
is accepted as such (by the Materialist). And not knowing 
the ignorance, &c., of others, and thus going about addressing 
people at random, one would be despised by the enquirers as 
a mad man. Consequently, (We assert) that the ignorance, 
&Ci, of others are inferred from such marks or characteristics, 
as difference of meaning or speech, &c. Thus, however nnwill- 



15 


[ 34 ^ 35 ] 


[k. v.l 


ing, the Materialist is constrained to accept Inference as a 
'distinct method of proof. 

(34). And Inference following directly from Perception, its 
^ definition mast follow close upon that of 

Perception ; therb again, on account of the 
• particalar definition being based on the 
general one, the author gives the latter first — “ It is preceded 
by {a notion of) the middle* and major terms; ” — the middle 
term being the VyApya or pervaded, and the major term, the 
Vy&paka or pervader. the pervaded ( VyApya) is that which 
is brought to its own natural sphere, after the removal of all 
dubious and assumed conditions ; and that by which the 
Vyapya is thus brought in, is the pervader ( VyApaka ). The 
mention of “ the mark and the marked,” both of which must 
be objects, indicates objective or snbstentive cognition. 
Inference proceeds from the knowledge of smoke as the per- 
vaded (the mark) and the fire as the pervader (the marked). 
Lingi (the marked) must be twice construed in the definition, 
in order to imply the minor premiss [in which is stated the 
relation of the minor term (the Paksha), with the middle term 
]. Thus the general definition of Inference comes to 
be thus: — ‘■'•Inference is (a method of cognition) preceded by 
(e. e., based on) the knowledge rf)f the relations of the major 
{Sddhya), the minor {Paksha) and the middle (fletv^ terms 
with one another.” [That is to say. Inference is the know- 
ledge derived from the major and the minor premises], 

(36). The author now sketches the divisions which have 

The tht«e kinds of ^eeu laid down by other systems also— 
Inference — (1) The “ Inference is of three kinds f i. e,, the spe- 

The divisions of Inference are three-fold — 

^eshavat), and ( 3 ) (i) The a priori fPurvavat — the inference 

the perception of spe- of the effect trom the cause, as of ram from 

gathering of the clouds], (ii) The a 
posteriori [!3eshavat — the inference of the 
bause, from the effect, as of rain from rise in the river], and 


* LUerally^^^ the mark anfl the marketi.’ 




[36 —38] 


16 


[k. V.] 


(iii) Inference from the perception of species or class [Inference 
based on relations other thab the causal, as of substantiality 
from earthiness]. * 

(36) . First of all, luference is of two kinds i(l) The 

Affirmative yJVita) and (2) the Negative 
That which is based on affirma- 
tive concomitance, is Vita ; and that based 
on negative concomitance, the Avita* 

(37) . Of these, Avita is Seshavat (a posteriori or analytic). 

The Negative- ^ *'*^”'*^ remains; and the 

The a posteriori In- Inferential knowledge having this re- 
ference. noainder for its ohject is called Seshavat. 

As is declaredf;— “ The cause in question being excluded, and 
(the qualification) not found elsewhere, the idea of the remain- 
ing (object) is Parisesha.'” [Vatsayaua Bh&shj'a on the Nyaya 
Sutras.] Examples of this Avita Inference, founded on nega- 
tion, will be given later on Kurikd IX]. 

(38) . The Vita is two-fold (1) Piirmvat {a priori or sijntke- 

The AffinnatiT(y- f^om the perception of species. 

The a priori and Of these Purva is that whose object is 
c*e*p t Un o'f the S'S lias the characteristics of its spe- 

Bpecies. cies known; and the Inferential knowledge 

of which this forms the object is'Purvavat ; as from the exis- 
tence of smoke is inferred the existance of an individual //•c in 
the mountain, — ^the characteristics of the species ‘ fire’ hav- 
ing been previously perceived in the culinary hearth. The 
second kind of Vita — the Inference based on the perception 
of the species — ^is that which has its object, such as has 

• The Vita has an A proposition for its major premiss ; and the Avita, an A 
proposition, converted, per accidens. 

' t As for instance, in a proposed, inference of the form — •* sonnd has earth for 
its substrate, since it is a quality’— the possibility of sound being in earth being 
excluded on the ground of its never being concomitant with smell, the quality' 
specific of earth ; and there being no possibility perceived, of sound residing 
elsewhere, wc have the notion of sound, being a quality specific of Yril (AHsd) 
as pariscisha. 



m 


17 


[k. v,] 


the characteristics of its species (previously) nnkaowu ; 
of this kind are all inferences with regard to the sense- 
organs ; because in all inferences of this kind, the existence 
of the cause of the perception of colour (i. e. vision) is inferred 
from th^ fact of its being an effect (and as such neces- 
sarily caused). Though the characteristics of instrumental 
cause in general* have been perceived in objects like axes, 
&c., yet those of the species of the particular kind of such 
causes — the sense-organs which are inferred to exist as 
causing the perception of colour, &c. — ^are nowhere perceived. 
Nor are the individuals — the particular sense-organs — form- 
ing the qjass ‘ Sense,’ perceptible to our mortal eyes ; as are 
those of the class ‘ Fire.’ In this lies the difference between 
the Purmvat (a j^riori) Inference and the Sdmunyatodrishta 
(Inference based on the perception of the species) ; though they 
resemble each other, inasmuch as both are Vita (affirmative). 
Here (in Sdmdnyatodrishta) drishta=^darsdna^ i. c., perception; 
and Sdmdnyatak == of Samaiiya, i. c., species or class ; to Sdmdnya 
is added the universal affix Tasi* Thus then the term 
means — ^ The Inference, consisting in the comprehension by 
the individual of a species whose general characteristics are 
not known.’ All this has been fully exidained by us in the 
NydyawHika^tdtparyatika and is not relocated here for 
fear of being too prolix. • 

m 

.(39). Since the comprehension of the connection of words 
(in a sentence) is preceded by a process of 
inference with regard to the cause of action 
of the experienced youth directed, on hear- 
ing the words of the experienced director, and further, since 
the comprehension of the meaning of a word is duo to the 
knowledge of its denotation, — therefore Valid Testimony, is 
preceded by, and based upon, Inference. Hence, after having 
defined Inference, the author next defines Valid Testimony. 

* Here, of course, having the force of the Genitive. 

3 



[ 40 - 43 ] 


18 


[K. V.] 


“ Valid Teatimony is trus revelation'* Here the mention of 
Valid Testimony is merely a statement 
of the term to be defined ; the rest forming 
^vem in the definition. ‘ Trne ’ means ‘ proper 

Kfinkfi, explained. i . • , i . 

hence ‘true revelation mcanb ‘proper 
revelation.’ ‘ Sruti* is the comprehension of the meaning of a 
sentence by means of the sentence. 


(40) . This is self-evident. It is true ; since all apparent 

discrejmncies and doubts with regard to 

cceding from the Veda, which is super- 
human. Thus also the knowledge obtained from Smritis, 
PurAnas, &c., which are founded on the Veda, becomes true. 

(41) . To the primeval Kajnla, in the b^eginning of the 

SmTitis ami Pura- Kalpa, we may attribute the reminiscence 
nas included in of the S'rnti studied in his previous birth, 
“Apta-Vachana. recollect, after the night’s sleep, the 

occurrences of the previous day. And so did the revered 
Jaigishavya, in his conversation with Avatta, speak of his 
reminiscence of his births extending over such a long time as 
ten Mahilkalpas : “ By me, evolving tlirough ten Mahakal- 

pas, &c.’’ w 

(43). By saying ‘ tj'ue revelation,’ all pretended revelations 
such as those of Sakya, Bhikshn, &o., — 
^®®“ The invalidity of 

these systems is dne to their making un- 
reasonable assertions, to want of sufficient basis, to their mak- 
ing statements contradictory to proofs, and lastly to their 
being accepted only by Mlechch/tas or other mean peojile. 

C- 

(43). ‘s’ distinguishes “ Valid Testimony ” from Inferenca. 

Diffcrcntialn of '^be meaning of a sentence is th6 Pmmeya 
Valid Testimony (the fact ‘to be proved): ‘sentence' or 
from Inference. t word ’ is not its property ; and as such could 

not be its mark or predicate. Nor does a sentence, ex-' 



f44“**45J 


19 


[k. v.] 


pressing a meaning, stand in need of the comprehension of the 
connection of the mark and the marked which are the neces- 
sary conditipns of Inference ; since the sentence of a new poet, 
previously unknown, expresses the meaning of sentences 
touching tinknown regions.* 


The other proofs 
postulated by other 
systems shown to be 
included in the three 
already defined. 


(44). Having thus defined proofs, 
generically as well as specifically, the other 
kinds of proofs, Analogy and the rest, 
postulated by others, can be shown to be 
included in the above. 


(46). * Analogy {UpamdnA) is exemplified as ‘ The gamya 
(a species of rnminants analogons to the 
manrSn ^^^be deer ) is like the cow.’ Bat the know- 
mciuded in Apt«» ledge produced by this statement is nothing 
more than that produced by our “Valid 
Testimony.” The knowledge that the term ^gavayd' 
denotes some object resembling the cow, is also nothing 
more than Inference. The object with reference to which 
experienced persons use a particular term, comes to be 
denoted by that term, in the absence 'of any other object 
(that could he so denoted), e.g., ifr?^ (the class ‘ cow ’) is denot- 
ed by n!. In the same manner experienced people having 
asserted that “ the object denoted by the term, ‘gavaya’ re- 
sembles the cow,” the term gavaya' comes to denote some- 
thiflg resembling the cow ; — and this knowledge is purely In- 
ferential. The cognition of similarity of the perceived 

* gavaya' the cow is the result of mere Perception; hence, 
the cow being recalled to memor)', the cognition of tho 

* gavaya' a' similarity thereto becomes perception, pure and 
simple. And it cannot be further urged that the similitudef 

■» 

* Whereaa^Infercnce can belong only to objects previously known. 

* t This is levelled against the assertion of Mandana Misra in his Mimtmta* 
nukrama/ni^ that the object of analogy is not either the gavaya or the cow, 
but the similarity of the one in the other, which cannot be eaid to be amen* 

liable to perception. 



[46] 


20 


[k! V.] 

existing in the cow is different from that in the ‘ gavaya ’ since 
the similarity of one species with another consists in both of 
them having a common mode of the conjunction of their 
various parts ; and this common method of conjunction can be 
one only ; and this being perceived in the ‘ gamya} must be 
the same in the cow also. Thus (we find) that nothing is left 
to be proved where Analogy conld be applied to advantage. 
Hence Analogy is not a distinct Proof. 

(46). Similarly Apparent Inconsistency (Arth3,patti) is 
not a distinct Proof. For the case of the 

mstofcTlArtMpatm assumption of the living ChaitVa being 
shown to be included oiitsidc, when he is not found at home, is 
in Inference. cited as an instance of Apparent Inconsis- 

tency. To us, Saukhyas, this is nothinjj mor^ than Inference* 
A particular object being non-pervading or finite, when not 
found in one place, must be in another. The major premiss — 
in the form, that a finite object being in one place cannot bo 
in another — ^is easily got at, with reference to our own bodies. 
Similarly the cognition of the external existence of an existing 
object, is inferred, from the mark of its not being in the house j 
and this process is purely Inferential. Chaitra’s existence 
somewhere else cannot set acide the fact of his non-existence in 
the hohse ; and as such, non-existence in the house conld, very 
reasonably, be urged as a reason for his being outside. Nor 
does the fact of his non-existence in the house cut off his e.Vist- 
ence altogether ; and consequently his entity could be said to 
retain itself outside. For Chaitra’s non-existence in the house 
contradicts either his existence in toto, or merely his existence 
in the house. The former alternative cannot stand, the subjects 
of the two propositions being different'^ If you say that by 
the general assertion — “he must be somewhere'''* (without finy 
definite place being mentioned), any particular place — even 


♦ It is only when two statements are made, with regard to one and tSie 
same subject, that they contradict each other ; which is not the case in tha 
pregeut instance. 




21 


[K. V.] 


[4<J 

the house — may be implied ; and as such the non-existence in 
}Ae house becomes uncertain; and thus there beiri" co-objectivity 
between the two propositions noticed above, they would con- 
tradict each other, — we reply : No: because the non-existence 
in the house having been ascertained by evidence — of Percep- 
tion in the present instance — cannot be set aside, on the ground 
of uncertainty, by the doiihtjul fact of his existence therein. It 
is not proper to assert that his proved non-existence in the 
house, while overthrowing his uncertain existence therein, 
would set aside his existence in toto and set aside all doubt 
(of his existence in space). Because Chaitra’s existence in the 
house^ beTng contradictory to his proved non-existence therein, 
is overthrown by this latter ; not so his existence hi loto ; since 
this latter fact is altogether disconnected witli the non-exist- 
ence in the konst. Thus it is very proper to say that the 
external existence of an entity is inferred from its characteristic 
of internal non-existence. Hence the assertion — that the 
subject of Arthdpatti is the removal of contradiction after due 
consideration of the strength of two contradicting proofs — ^is 
set aside ; for there is no real contradiction between the parti- 
cular (the proof of non-existence in the house) and the general 
(that of mere existence). The other examples of Arthdpatti 
may similarly be shown to be injjluded in Inference. Hence 
it is established that Apparent Inconsistency {Arthajiatti) is 
not a proof distinct from (Disjunctive) Inference. 


(47). Negation {Abhdcd) again is nothing more than 
mere Perception. The Negation of a ‘jar’ 

Negation (Abhfiva) jg nothing uiore than a particular modifica- 
shown to be includ- _ _ , , , . - i i 

ed in Perception. tiou of thc Earth characterised by (its) 

absence. Since all existences, witli the 
single exception of Consciousness or Intelligence {Chit — Sakti)^ 
, are momentarily undergoing modifications, all of which are 
perceptible to thc senses ; therefore there is no ground left un- 
covered by Perception for which we should postulate a distinct 
^ proof ill the shape of Negation (Aihatm). 



[k. VI.] 


[ 48 — 50 ] 


22 


(48) . “Probability” (ASamiAa»a)—e. the knowledge, 

of the existence of lesser weights in' 

bhaJ^)t!own toTe Ones— is also an instance of Infer- 

included in Infer- ence. The heavier weight is known as not 
capable of existing without the lesljer ones; 
and this fact leads to the belief in the existence of the latter 
in the former, 

(49) . That is called “Ruraour” {Aitikya^, by the Sankhyas^ 

whose lirst speaker is unknown, and 
fliMarfcd'^-is^aflwd- which is handed down by mere tradition — 
ing doubtful testi- e. g.^ ‘ a Yaksha resides in the Vjta tree,’ 
This — Rnmonr — ^is not a proof ; since it is 
doubtful owing to the fact of the first speaker being unknown. 
“Valid Testimony,” however, is that of which the speaker 
is known to be veracious. Thus the thrce-foldness of proofs 
is established. 


(60). Thus have been defined severally the different kinds 
of proof, with a view to demonstrate the existence of the Mani^ 
Jested^ the Unmanifested and the Knowing, Of these, the 
Manifested — earth, &c., — are perceptible in their true form, 
even to the common ploughman. And similarly the a priori 
Inferenpe with regard to the existence of fire in the mountain, 
could easily be arrived at through the mark of the smoke. Such 
being the case, a system of philosophy, propounded for tjie 
sake of these, loses much of its importance and necessary 
character. Hence what is diflScult to be got at (by ordinary 
methods) should be explained by philosophy. Consequently 
the cases of application of the different proofs are laid down. 

KArikA VI. 

Knowledge of supersensuous objects is pbtained 
through Inference — the Sdmanya- > 
cation Ae*dMer- todrishta. What is not proved by this 
^ IS proved by revelation. 



23 


[k. ti.] 


[51-— 53] 

(61). The particle 5 distinguishes the SAmanyatodrishta 
•from Perception and Inference a priori. Through the 
SAmAnyatodrishta Inference there arises knowledge of 
Pradhdna* (Primordial Matter or Nature), and the Spirit 
both of which transcend the senses,— and this knowledge is 
due to the operation of Bnddhi reflected in Consciousness 
Chaitanya (belonging to Spirit). The above implies the appli- 
cation of the Seshavat (Negative) Inference also. 

(52). Then, does the SAmdnyatodrishta Inference alone 
apply to all objects transcending the senses ? If so, we shall 
haveto,deny the existence of the Great Principle (Mahat), 
&c., as also of Heaven, Destiny and the Gods in heaven, in the 
case of which the inference does not apply. Hence it is said 

‘‘ Sy this, ^r.,” and as a simple “ by this ” would suffice to 

give the required meaning, the must be taken as referring 
to Seshavat (Negative) lufcrence.t 


(63). Objection — Granted all this. But the non-percep- 
tion of snch objects as ‘ sky-flowers,’ &c., loads to their being 
accepted as non-entities; in the same way we might infer the 
non-existence of Nature, and the rest (which are like sky- 
flowers not amenable to percepti«Jn ). This being the case, why 


♦ Henceforth Pratlh^na, Prakriti or Avyakta will, £or the sake of simplicity, 
be translated as ‘Nature.* 

*}• There is a difference of opinion among Commentators as to the explana- 
tion of this Ksirikii, especially the first half of it. Vaehaapati Misra, as 
have seen, explains it as--‘we have a knowlcxlgc of supersensuous objects, 
through the SAmAtujdtodrishta. Inference.* G:iudai)ada takes it the same way. 
But N^i-Ayana Tirtha explains thus— “ In ^ Sdnidnyatah,' the affix HaxV is 
substituted for the genitive case-termination. Thus the meaning is that of all 
(generic) objects amenable to the senses, we have a knowle^lge from Perception^ 
&C.** This la.st is the sense accepted by Davies in his translation. But the 
former interpretation appears to be the more reasonable. Because it cannot Ije 
"said that Inference does not apply to <d)jects amenable to the senses. Davies, 
ih a foot-note in, loco, says that ‘ SS.mdnya,' “does not mean, &c.** But he loses 
flight of the fact that “ 8dm{myatodrUhta ** is the technical name of a parti- 
cular kind of inl'crcncet 



24 


[ 54 ] 


[k. vil] 


have recourse to the various kinds of Inference for the sake of 
these latter ? 

The reply is — 

KArikI VII. 

“(Non-perception arises) from excessive distance, 
extreme proximity, destruction of the sense-organs, 
absence of mind (inattention), subtlety (or minuteness), 
intervention (or the existence of some intermediate 
barrier), predominance (of other objects), and from 
intermixture with with other like objects.” . 

(54). The “ non-pcrception” of the following K&rik^ is to 
be construed along with this, in accordance with the maxim 
of the “ looking (back) of the lion.”* 

A bird soaring high, though existing, is yet not per- 
ceived on account of extreme remoteness. 

The diflerent causes ‘Extreme’ (ati) must also be taken with 
of objects, plained, ' proximity {samipya)~e. g., the non-per- 
ception, through extreme nearness, of the 
collyrinm (aiijana) in the eye. 

I)estrucUo7i of organs^' — hlinclness, deafness, &c. 

absence of mind''* — ^As a person, under the 
influence of (some very strong) desire, &c., does not perceive 
objects, even in bright daylight, tliough (piitc within the 
range of his senses. 

« From Minutoiess'^ — As for instance, however, much we 
may concentrate our mind ( 2 . however attentively we 
may look) we can never perceive atoms, though under our 
very eyes. 

^^From Intervention'’ — c. one cannot see tJie yueen 

behind the walls. ' 


* << The maxim of the lion’s (backward) glance, is generallj used to mark 
the Gonuection of a thing with what precedes and follows.’’ [Vide, The 
^"yaya»LatikLi in loco,] 



[55-r56] 


S5 


[k. vni.J 


“ From subjugation or suppressiorC* — e. g., the non-per- 
j^ption of the constellations, suppressed by the brighter rays 
of the snn. 

t 

From intermixture ^'* — as one does not preceive drops 
of rain-vrtiter, disai)pearing in a tank. 

(65) . Tlie in the Karikh has a collective force, implying 

even those not liere mentioned; such as ^ non^-productioiC 
is also among the causes of non-percei)tion — as one cannot 
perceive, in the milk, the curd, not yet produced therefrom. 

(66) . The upshot of the whole then is, that tlie non-exist- 
ence of ascertain object cannot be inferred merely from the 
fact of its not being perceived ; for there is danger of the 
principle being unwarrantably stretched too far. Thus, for 
instance, a certain individual, getting out of his house, can 
never be he said* to be assured of the non-existence of the 
inmates, simply on the ground of his not seeing tliem. The 
fact is tliat it is only with reference to objects capable of 
being perceived on the occasion, that iion-perceiition leads to 
the inference of their non-existence. And this capability of 
being perceived can never belong to Nature &c., (which arc by 
their nature imperceptible) ; and as such it is not proper for 
intelligent men to infer their non-existence merely from their 
non-perception or imperceptibilit;*. 


Qiieslion — Which of the above — mentioned causes (of non- 
perception) a 2 )plies in the case of Nature, &c. ? The reply 

KArika VIII. 


The non-apjmohensiou of this (Nature) is due to its 


,Jhe non-appre* 
bension of Nature, 
due to subtlety and 
not tonon-eiistence 
jtsezistence verified 
by its effects. 


subtlety, not to its non-existence ; 

since it is appreli ended through its 

clfects. Tliese effects are the Great 
■% 

Principle, and the rest — effects (some 


^ of) which are similar, and (some) dissimilar to Nature. 



[•07—59] 


26 


[k. vm.] 


( 67 ). Why should we not, continues the objector, attribute 
the non-apprehension of Nature to its non-existence, as we d% 
of the seventh kind of unction (in rhetoric)? ^ 

The Author replies . — rim to its non-existence^'* Why ? 
^^liemase it is ((pj)reli(indej^ tkrou(jh its ejfcctsy //f refers to 
Nature. The proofs of the apprehension of t*he Spirit will be 
mentioned later on, in Knrika XVII. If wc find direct 
perception inapplicable in the case of objects, whose existence 
is ascertained I)}' means of evidence other than that afibrded 
by perception itself, wo at once infer the ina])plicability to be 
due to incapacity* (and not to non-existence of the object 
itself). t The seventh unction on the otlier hand, haS not its 
existence asccrtaiiuMl by any proof, and as such, the , incapacity 
of perception cannot be urged in its case. 


(58). Granted all this, but whicih are flic effects from 
whoso oxistonco, you infer that ofNalnro? The reply is — 
*^'‘The Great Principle^ and the rest are the ej/ects!"* 


This will be proved later on (Karikii XXII.) Next are 
mentioned the similarity and dissimilarity in Ibrin, of these 
erifects, Avitli Nature — the comprehension of both of which is 
auxiliary to discriminative kjiowledgc : — ^'•Similar and 
dissimilar to NatureP 

Tliis.divisiou -will be I'nrtber treated of in Kurika XXIII 


et. scq. 

DifFcront views 
with regard to tlie 
nature of the elfeot. 
(1). The Jhiuddha 
view of the eJfcct 
beinj^' an entity 
arising from non- 
onLity'. (2). 3 

Vedanta view of the 
whole aeries of 
effects being nmeie 


(59). F rom (the existence of) the 
efU‘ct is inferred (tliat of) tlie cause : — on this 
point there is diversity of opinion. Thus 
some })hilosophers (the Bauddhas) assert 
tlio 2 )roduction of entity Irom non-entity. 
Others (the Vcdantists) rei)rescnt the w^ole 


* On the part of perception. • 

f This statement is with referenqp to Nature, the existence of which i8 
])roved through its effects— the proof being based on the general propositi®n 
“Every effect must have a cause.” The effects, Mahat, «S:c., are perceptibl<~ 
these must have a cause, and this cause is Nature. 



[CO]- 


27 


[k. vm.] 


evolution from a sin- 
cle real entity, (il). 
The Nyaya and 
Vaisesbika view of 
the ^effect bein^ a 
non-entity arising 
from entitf. (4). 
The Silnkhya view 
of the ellijct being 
an entity arising 
from an entity. 


series of effects as a mere evolntion from a 
single entity, and not a real entity in it- 
self. A third set of philosophers (the 
Nayayikas) hold the production of non- 
entity from entity. The Si\nkhyas lastly 
teacli that from entity emanates entity. 


(60). Now, wo cannot establish the existence of Nature, 
... in accordance with the first tliroc theories. 

Tho impossibility rm tt • • i i- n n T 

of the existence of 1 he Universe consists essentially of sound, 

nature being proved arc different forms and modi- 

in accordaifce w'lth ’ 

the first three fications of pleasure, pain and delusion, — 
and as sucli bears testimony to the charac- 
ter of Nature, which lies in its being constituted by goodness, 
passion and darkness. Such being tho case, if we assert the 
produ(*.ti!)ii of entity from non-entity (the Ikiuddha view) [we 
would land ourselves ill an absurdity] r/.c;., how conld the 
cause, an undeliuable (niiroal) non-eul ity, consist of sound, 
and the rest which are different forms of pleasure, &c.? For, 
certainly wo cannot hohl the identity of entity and non-entity' 
(two opposites). Nor could tlic doctrine of tlie emanation of 
entity from entity (tlieSankhya view) be u[)lield in accordance 
with the theory that the phenomena of sound, &c., are mere 
evolutions from a single entity (the Vedanta view)! Nor 
again could we attrilmto phcuomeiiality (or changeability) to 
tlic*siiigle ; in fact the notion of such pheiiomeuality (cluinge- 
ableiiess) with regard to the nuphonomoiial (iiricliangeable) 
Avould be a mistake. Even in the theory of Jvauada and 
Gautama, who niaiutain the production of iion-eiitity from 
entity, tlie existence of Nature cannot be proved ; since, 
according to them, the caibsc is not identical with the effect, 
inasmuch as entity and non-entity are diagonally opposed to 
each otliej.* 


* According to the Nayayikas the cause is an entity, the effect a non- 
entity ; and since an entity and a non-entity cannot be identical, therefore 
^jthe cause and the effect cannot be identical. 



[61—63] 


'28 


[k.ti.3 


( 61 ). Hence, in order to establish the existence of Nature, 
the author first declares the effect to be an entity, (even prior 
to causal operation). 


KAiuka IX. 

The effect is an entity ; * (1) because a non-entity can 
never be brought into existence ; (2) 

The five proofs of /» / t . 

the effect being an because of a (determinate) relation of 
tlie cause (with tlie elfect) ; (3) be- 
cause everything cannot be possible (by any and every 
means) ; (4) because a competent (cause) can do (only) 
that for which it is competent ; and (5) lastly, because 
the effect is non-differerit from the cause. 


(62) . The effect is an entity — that is to say, it is so even 

prior to the operation of the cause. Against 
this theory, the Nayayikas cannot urge the 
fault of the absurdity of the production of an 
already existing object. Beciause though the production of the 
sprout and the jar is consecpient upon the destruction of the 
seed and the lump of clay respectively, yet causal energy can 
only be attributed to an entity in the sliape of the seed, and 
not to its destruction [a kind of negation, a non-entity]. 
Further if you assert tlie production of entity from non-entity, 
this latter, being at any time available, would give rise to the 
(absurd) possibility of any and every effect being produced at 
any and all times. All this has been explained by us iu the 
Nydya^drtiliatatj)aryatihd. 

(63) . The belief in the existence of the phenomenal 

world cannot be said to be illusory unless 

The Veddnta view we have some proof invalidating its 
net. • L ^ 

existence.’' 


* Thifl is urged against the Vedilnta theory of the effect being an 
erolntion from a single real entity. 



[k. IX. 3 


84 ^ 5 ] 29 

(64^. Now remains the theory of Gautama and Kanilda, 
with reference to which the author asserts — 

Va^eshfka vfewS “ 8«PPO'*t of 

ticised; and the this assertion, the following proofs are 

bfishetf.^ adduced: — (1) Sbice a noyi’-eiititjf can 

. never be brought into existence^ If the 
efiect were a non-entity before the operation of the cause, it 
could never be brought into existouce by anybody. By even a 
thousand artists blue can never be made yellow. If you assert 
entity and non-entity to be mere properties belonging to the 
jar, then in that case, the qualified object (the jar) being non- 
existent, no property could belong to it; and as »iich the entity 
the (property) remains in the same condition {i, c., cannot be 
attributed to the jar). Nor can non-entity (as a quality) be 
attributed to it? For, how can non-entity belong to the jar 
(as a property) when it is neither in any way related to it 
nor cognate to it ? Hence as after tlie causal operation, so 
too before it, the effect subsists. 

Such being the case, all that remains to bo done by the 
cause is the manifestation or unfolding of the pre-existing 
effect [i. 6’., its emanation from the cause wherein it has been 
lying latent]. The manifestatio?» of something existing before- 
hand is a fact (luite compatible with experience ; ai^ of the 
oil from sesamurn by pressure, of rice from paddy by thumping, 
afid of milk from cows, by milking. On the other hand, we 
have no instance of the manifestation of a non-entity ; for a 
non-entity is never seen to be either manifested or produced. 

(66). (2) For the following reason also does the effect 
subsist before the operation of the cause : Because of a 
{determinate) relation of the cause with the efecC'* That is to 
say, the,effect subsists because of the relation holding between 
itself and its material cause. ^ That is, the cause produces 
4he effect when in relation with it ; and (we all know) that 
no relation with a non-existing effect is possible ; hence the 
effect must be an entity. 



[66—67] 30 [k.tx.] 

(66) . Granted all this ; but, continues the objector 
wherefore is the effect not pr<Khuu»)le by causes unconnected 
therewith? We reply, that under such cirenmstanejs, 
only non-entity would be produced. With this reply in view 
the author lays down : — 

(^) Shine everijtkhifj caniint be possible — If the effect 
unconnected witli the cause could be produced (by that cause), 
then every effect would arise from every cause (witliout 
restriction), there being no other limitation save that of 
unconnoctodness (which any ('.ause can liave with reference to 
any effect.) Hut such is not the cas(‘. Hence a connected 
effect only can be produced by a connected cause, and not an 
unconnected effect by an unrelated one : — as say the 
SA,nkhyas — There is no rela tion of the cause, imlaiedwith 
entity, with non-entity ; those holding the production of an un- 
connected effect will land themselves in a regresms ad 

(67) . Objection: Bo it so : But an entity, though un- 
related, will always produce the effect for whicli it is 
competent ; (lud this comp(‘tericy too could be inferj*ed from 
the presenc.e of the effect, and as such wc sail clear of the 
regress as ad injhiii am, 

lie pig: (4) Since a coty^yeterd cause does that for ivkick it 
is competent'* — Now thou, asks our author, does this 
^ Capabilitg ov coinpetencg * belonging to the cause imbiuid 
with the causal eiKjrgy, a])j)Iy to every effect or only w those 
to which the cause is competent? If the former, then the 
same confusion arises ; if tlie latter, then the following ques- 
tion wdll arise — liow does the energy apjdy to non-entity? 
On this point if it be asserted that the (causal) energy itself is 
so constituted as to produce only certain effects, not other*" ; 
tlieii we ask — Is this peculiarly coustituted energy of yours 
connected with the particular effect or not ? In tlie former 
case, no relation being possible with a non-entity, the effect 
must be an entity : in the latter, you have the same endless 
series of causes and effects. Hence it is reasonably declared 



31 


[08—69] 


[k. is.] 


that (the effect is an entit}') “ beea.usc a competent cause can 
mlf/ r>roduce an effect for which it is competent.'^'* 


(68). (o) For the following reason too is the eftcct an 

entity : ^'‘Since the effect is connate {non-different) with the 
caused ' — The eftec't is not differont from the cause; and the 
cause is an oiitify ; then how-can the effect, non-different from 
this latter, bo a non-entity ? 


(69). The proofs establishing the non-ditference of cause 

and effe(*t are tlie following : {a) The cloth 

Proofs o^iho non- ofFoct) is uot dilferont from the tlireads 

difforenoe of cause . . • i . . . 

and efTect. (>ts material cjuise), since it is a property 

characteristically inhering in the latter 
[/. c., since the ^loth inheres in the threads constituting it]. 
An obj(?ct ditfering in its essence from another, can never 
inluu’e in it ; as tlie cow in the horse ; but the cloth is inliercnt 
in the threads ; hence it is not different from it in its essence- 
(fi) Owing to the cansal relation sahsisting* botwoen the cloth 
and the thread, they differ not in essence ; becausi^ the cansal 
relation can never subsist between objects essentially dilFcnmt 
from one another — e. ff. lietween ja,r and cloth. But between 
cloth and threads we do tind the cansal relation subsisting ; 
hence they can never differ from one another, in essciijrae. (r) 
For tlie following reason also, thon^ is no diffciaiuce between 
clgth and threads : because of the alisenee of junction and non- 
contiguity between tlie two. Wo see junction taking place 
between objects differing from one aiiotlicr, as between a pool 
and sh tree ; the same with r(»gard to non-contigiiity, as 
between the Iliniavaii and the Yindhya. In the instance 
b<?fore ns, Iiowever, there is neither junction nor non-contignity, 
an^l as such, no diilerence in essence, (d) For the following 
reason too, cloth and tliread do not difier in essence; because 
of the noh-inclnsion (in the particular eflect) of any (other) 
*eficct different in weight (froih the cause). As a matter of 
fact, an oliject differing in essence from another always has a 
weight different from that of the latter — e. /y, the lowering of 



32 


[K. IX.] 


[ 70 ] 

the balance caused by two palas* is more than that caused by 
a single But we find no such difference between the 

effects of the weight of the cloth and those ot the weight of 
the threads constituting it. Hence cloth is non-different irom 
the threads. These arc the proofs afforded by a process of 
negative inference [Avf(d?titm4na — see, Kdrikd V] establish- 
ing the non-difference (of cloth" and threads ill particnlar, and 
of cause and effect in general). 

( 70 ). The nou-difFercnce being thus established, (it is 
decided that) the cloth is only a particular development of the 
threads combining themselves in various ways ; and that the 
two do not differ from each other in essence. No essential 
difference can be proved on the ground of self-contradictory 
actions in themselves (/. e,^ the effects), (difference apprehended 
in) language, or the difference in action (of the cause and that 
of the effect).! Because these dittt'reuccs do not contradict 
each other, when we see that they are brought about by the 
appearance and disappearance of particular conditions — as for 
iustaiice, the limbs of tlie tortoise disappe^ar on entering its 
body and appear again on emerging from it ; but for this, we 
cannot say that the limbs are either produced from, or 
destroyed by, the tortoise. In the same manner, jar, crown, 
&c., which are only particular developments of clay, gold, &c., 
on emanating from these latter, arc said to l)e produced ; and 

* A particuliiv weight. 

t i^clf-contradirtory nrtioug hi themsdvf-s, AVhen tho cloth i.s reducey to 
threads, we say ‘the dohh is drstroi/rdy an<l the are now 

dfintrwftiim and pnulvHinn are diagonally opposed ; and as such oannot 1x3 
predicated of the same thing at: one and the same time ; but we do predicate 
prodKrth}i ihrrads and dvsttnictUm at one and the sarn^ 

time. So they differ. 

J)}ffrt'rncr apjjrehcndrd i/i language — ^as when we use such sentences a3-*« 
"Cloth is made of threads.’* 

Dlffcrrnrc in action — Thus wo see that cloth can cover an object which 
certainly the threads cannot. And objects ditfering in their actioi^ must differ 
in essence. ^ 

These throe are the objections brought forward against the theory of t^je 
non-difference of cause and effect. Each of these is considered and refuted 
separately in tho following linos. 



83 


[:i— 72] 


[k.jx.], 


on entering them again (i. e., l)emg changed into clay, &c.,) 
Iiey disappear and are said to be destroyed. 


br again can a non>entity ever be produced or an entity 
» destroyed ; as says the revered Krishnax 

The BhagavadgitA dvaipayana: — “There is neither an exist- 
khyaview. cnce Of non-entity, nor non-existence of 

entity” {Bhagmadgita II — 16]. As the 
tortoise is not different from its own contracting and expand- 
ing limbs, so also are jar, crown, &c., not different from (their 
material cause), clay, gold, &c. The assertion “ cloth is in («. 
made of)^tIireads,” is as consistent as the assertion — “Tilaka 
trees in this forest.”* 


(71.) Nor does difference of purpose and action establish 
difference in essence ; since a single substance can have mani- 
fold functions, as the fire alone can barn, digest and give light. 
Nor is fixity of purpose and action a gronnd of difference 
among snbstances, ; for we see that this fixity varies in the 
substances themselves, taken singly or collectively; as a 
bearer, in company with other bearers, can carry the palanquin, 
which he can never do when alone. Similarly, the threads 
though unable to cover, when token singly, yet do cover when 
conjoined and thus having their ekistence as cloth manifested 
(t. e., having developed into cloth). 

(73). Objection '. — Granted all this. But, is the mani- 
festation or appearance itself an entity or a 
bsfs nature non-eutity, prior to the operation of the 
of the wMmfeitatioH gangg ? If tJje latter, then you admit the 
production of non-entity. If, however, 
yog hold to the former alternative, then have done with the 
causal agency altogether ; for we do not see the necessity of 
• . 

As the Tilaka trees, constituting the forest, are nothing besides the 
forestitself.-aiidyet we speak of the ‘‘Tilaka trees in the forest," so with 
the assertion with regard to the cloth and threadst 

5 



[73—75] 


34 


[k. IX.] 


the cansal operation when the effect already exists. If yon 
assnme the manifestation of the manifestation, yon will he 
landed on a regresam ad infinitum. Hence the ^ assertipii, 
that ‘ the threads are made to have their existence as cioth 
manifested,’ is invalid. 

(73) . To all this we make the following reply. Even on 

. _ yonr own theory of the production of non- 

entity, we ask — ^what is this ^p'oduction ’ — ? 

thwries *** ****** An entity or a non-entity? If an entity, 
then have done with the agency of the 
cause ; if, however, you assert it to be a non-entity, you will 
have to postulate the production of that production and so on 
ad infimtumlanA such being the case, the fault of regreasus 
ad infinitum you urged against ns, loses its force, since it is 
common to both of us ; and consequently it is not fair to urge 
it against one].* 

(74) . If, in order to avoid the regreaaua ad infinitum, you 
declare that the production is nothing more or less than the 
cloth itself ; — then the notion of cloth would coincide with 
that of production ; and as such, on saying cloth, one should 
not add ia produced (because it would be a useless repetition) ; 
nor could he say the cloth ia deatroyed ; because detraction 
and production (denoted by tlotii) can never coexist. 

(76)'. Consequently, we have only two alternatives : the 
production of the cloth must inhere either in its material 
cause (the threads), or in its mere exiatence (^Sattd). In 
either case, the cloth cannot be produced without the operation 
of causes. Thus it is proved that the operation of the cause 
is necessary for the manifestation of already existing effects. 
(If yon urge against ns the common saying — ‘causes do 
(produce) the forms of cloth” — ^then we reply that) the causes 
have no relation with the forms of cloth ; because these 
forma are not actiona, and it is only with actions that causes 
are related ; or else they lose their character. ' 

* This point has been discnssed by S'anharftchSrya, in his BhSshyn on the 
Vedftnta Batins, under the aphorism " Stcapak*liado*h<Uhch«." 




[76^1] 35 [k.!.] 

(76). Thus then it is proved that the effect is an entity. 


(>?). Having thus proved the effect to be an entity, a 
fact favenrable to the doctrine of the existence of Nature, the 
author next states the similarity and dissimilarity between 
the Manifested ahd the Unmanifested, a right comproheusion 
of which appertains to discriminative knowledge ; and this 
is done in order to show the character of Prakriti, whose 
existence is to be proved. 


KAbikA X. 

The Manifested has a cause : it is neither eternal 


Points of dissimi- 
Imrity between the 
Manifested and thfi 
Unmanifested. 


nor pervading (*. e., universal) ; it is 
active (*. e., mobile or modifiable), 
multiform, dependent, predicative (or 


characteristic), conjunct and subordinate. The tin- 


manifested is the reverse. 


(78) . “ Jletumat ” — i. e., having cause. The question as 
All the quaiiflca- to what is the cause of what, will be 

tions explained. dealt with later on (K&rikd. XXII). 

(79) . Not Eternal''* — i. c., ‘destructible, revolving [re- 

turning to the condition of its material cause*]. 

<:80). “ Not pervading '* — that is to say, the Manifested 
does not extend over all evolving or developing substances. 
The effect is pervaded by the cause but not vice versa, e. g.. 
Consciousness (Buddhi) can never pervade Nature (Prakriti), 
and as such is non-pervading. 

isi). “ Active ” — i. e., mobile. Consciousness (Buddhi), 
&c., have mobility inasmuch as they renounce certain 
.bodies tliey have hitherto occupied, and occupy others; 


* Since the SSnkhyas do not admit of an otter annibilatioo of a 
sobstance. 



[82r— 86] 36 X.] 

as for the taobilSty of earth, &c., it is too well known to seed 
an explanation. 

(82) . “ Multiform ” — Since Conscionsness Act, di%^'^ in 

different individnals ; earth, &c., too are. multiform in the 
shape of jars, Ac. * 

(83) . “Dependent” — On its canse; though the effect is 
lion-different from its cause, yet the assertion of the relation 
of subserviency is hase<l npon a difference conventionally 
accepted ; as we say — “ the Tilakas in the forest.” 

(84) . “ Characteristic or predicative ” — i. e., of Nature. 
Conscionsness (Bnddhi), Ac., are characteristics o^. Nature, 
which cannot he its own characteristic, though it can he so of 
the Spirit (Purnsha). 

(85) . “ Conjunct ’’—Bearing in itself the relation of whole 

and parts. Conjunction consists in approach preceded hy (i. e.^ 
after) non-approach ; and connection with such approach of 
the whole to the part is what is connoted by “ conjunct 
as for instance, earth, Ac., conjoin among themselves, and so 
do others. On the other hand, there is no conjunction 
of Natnre (Prakriti) with Conscionsness (Bnddhi), since 
the two are connate (and as such there can be no non- 
approach); nor is there reciprocal conjunction among 
Goodness, Foulness and Darkness, since there is no non- 
approach among them [since they all conjointly inhere in 
Nature], 

(86) . Subordinate” — Conscionsness stands in need of 
the aid of Nature in the completion of the production of its 
effect, Self-rcomciousness (Ahank&ra). Without this aid, 
being hy itself too weak, it conld not be efficient to produce 
its effect. Similarly do Self-consciousness and the rest stand in 
need of similar aids in the prodnetion of their several effeots. 
.Thns, each and all stand in need of the perfecting hand of 
Natnre. Hence the Manifested, though efficien't in the 
production of its effects, is yet subordinate, inasmuch as if ' 
stands in need of the aid of the Supreme Nature (the highest 
in the scale). 



187 —' 


37 


(87). “ The JJnfnanifegted is the reverse" — i. of the 

S jsted. That is to say — the Unmanifested is uncaused, 
[, pervading, and inactive (immobile)— though to 
ti does belong the action of evolution (or development,) 
yet it ^n have no mobility — single, independent (self- 
sufficient), non-predicative, unconjnnct, compact (t. e., not 
made up of parts), and non-snbservient (supreme). 


(88) . Having thus explained the dissimilarities of the 
Manifested and the Unmanifested, the author now mentions 
the similgirities between these, and the dissimilarity of both 
of these again from the Spirit: 

KArikA XI. 

The Manifested has the three constituent Attributes 

The point, ot (^““^s), it IS indescriminating, object- 
Bimiiftrity between iye, ffencric (or coinmon), non-intel- 
the Unmanifested ligent (or insentient) and productivaw 
rimiiaritj* of ^ these So also is Nature. The Spirit is the 

from the soul. j x i /• ^ v 

reverse, and yet also (in some respects) 
similar. * 

(89) . “ Having the three constituent Attributes." — ^That is 
to say, the Manifested is possessed of the three attributes of 
pleasure, pain and dnlness. By this assertion are set aside all 
the theories attributing pleasure and pain to the Spirit. 

(90) . Indescriminative” — i. e., as Nature is not des- 
criminated from itself ; so too the Great Principle (Mahat or 
Bu^dhi) being connate with Nature, cannot be descriminated 
from it. Or indescrimnativeness may mean merely co^opera^ 
tiveness: nothing singly (among the Manifested) can be a cause 
e|Bcient for its effect ; it can b6 so only when in company 
with others ; and as such no effect is possible from any cause 
taken singly by itself. 



[k. XI,] 


[ 91 — 94 ] 


38 


(91). Some (the Vijn^na-VSdi Banddhas) assert that it is 

AnobiectionbM- (Vijnftna) atone that is denoted V/ 

ed oQthe Idealism the words pleasure, pain and dnlness ^^nd 
of the Banddhss. exists nothing besides 

that conld possess these (pleasures, &c.,) as its attribhtes. 

In opposition to this view it is laid down' that the Mani- 
fested is “ objective” (= perceptible). That 
. Idealistic jg jq g^y — it ig go outside (and as such over 

objection set aside. ^ , 

and above) Vijnana, and as such it is 
“ Common” — i. e., perceived (simultaneously) by many 
persons. If, however, these were nothing more or Jess than 
Yijn&na, then in that case, this latter being uncommon 
(or specifically belonging to particular individuals), all 
the Manifested elements would be so also ; for the 
Vijnana of one person can never be perceived by another, 
owing to the imperceptibility of any intellect other than the 
.agent’s own. On the contrary, in the case of a Manifested 
substance (such as) the glances of a dancing girl, the attentive- 
ness of many persons to that single object is quite a consistent 
fact, which it conld not be if wc were to reduce all existence 
to mere Idea or Vijnana. 


(92). “ Non-intelUgent or Insentient .” — Nature (Prakriti), 
Conscionsness (Biiddhi), <fec., are all non-intelligent. We do 
not, like the VainA/sikas (a scion of the Bauddhas) attribute 
intelligence to Buddhi. 


(93) . '•'•Productive or Prolific” — i. e., possessed of the 
faculty of producing or developing. The particular possessive 
affix {Matu) is used in order to denote the constant character 
of the property of productiveness with regard to the Mani- 
fested. That is to say, these are ever accompanied by their 
several emanations or developments, whether similar' or 
dissimilar. 

* j t. 

(94) . “ So also is Nature ” — t. e., as the Manifested is, ao 
is the Unmanifested Nature. That is to say, the properties 
of the Manifested., just enumerated, belong to Nature also. 



[ 96 — 97 ] 39 [k. XI.} 

(96) . The dissimilarity of these from the Spirit is stated— 
'averse is the Spirit” 

Objection ; — Granted all this : But how can yon 
assert the Spirit to be the reverse of the 

Objectio^— -Tliere jlanifested and the TJnmanifested ; when 

are points of simi- ^ • -i •. 

laiity also between we see that tliere are points oi similarity 

MMlfea^M^weii '^^tween the Spirit and the Uumanifested — 

as the Unmanifcst* snch as Uncausedness, Etemality, &c., — 

***• and also between the Spirit and the Mani- 

fested — such as plurality ? 

We rejdy : “ Yet also ” — that is to say, though there are 

Theobjectioncon. of similarity, such as uncausedness, 

ceded to-there ore &c., yet there are points of dissimilarity 
M 'weV^M “f *di^, non-possession of the 

similarity. ’ triad of attributes (GunasX and the rest. 

(97) - The Manifested and the ITnmanifested have been 
described as having ‘three Attributes’.* Now the author 
names and describes these three Constituent Attributes : 

* This word Attribute requires some explanation. It stands for the Ouna» 
of the Sdnkhjas— a term denoting the constituent elements of Nature or 
Primordial Matter as says Colebrooke-^** These three qualities are not 
mere accidents of Nature, but are of its essence and enter into its composi- 
tion.” On this Davies very rightly remarks—” Nature or Primordial Matter 
is de^scribed, in the system of Kapila as formed by the Gunas, which were 
primarily in equilibrium, and so long as this state existed, there was no 
emanation into separate forms of matter.” And, as we shall see later on, 
the intert condition of Nature is disturbed by the subsequent predomioance 
of the Attribute of Foulness (Rajas). Davies has rendered this important 
word— -by Mode, I am afraid this is apt to mislead. For Mode^ as 
understood by Western philosophers, is an affection of a substance, ” a 
quality which it may have or not, mthout affecting ite essence or existence.” 
No^M we have seen the Chsna of the S&nkhyas is almost the reverse of 
this— it belongs to a substance as constituting its very essence. I have 
perferred to translate Ouna as Attribute — using the latter term in the sense 
knparted to it specifically, by Spinoza, who thus distinguishes between 
Attribute and ” By Attribute^ I understand, that which the mind 

perceives of substance a$ constituting its essence. By Mode, I understand! 
the affections of substances, Ac*,” (the italics are mine)*— G. J. 



[98—100] 


40 


[k. XH.], 


; KIbikA XII. 


The Attributes are of the nature of love, aversicj,' 
and stupefaction. They are ado.pted 

The character of , ... .... j * • j. 

the three Attributes to illumination, activity, and restraint; 

(Chinas). they mutually subdue, and sup- 

port, and produce each other and consort together (for 
one purpose), 

(98). These are called Gunaa (literally, subsidiary or second- 
ary) because they exist for the sake of otliers (the Spirits). 
The three Attributes will be named in order in 'the next 
Karika. And according to the maxim of presight, common 
among writers, the “ love, &c.,*’ of this Karik& are to be taken 
in the same order (as “ Goodness, &c.,” in the next). 


(99). Thus then, “ jjnte" (love) being (a form of) pleasure, 
the attribute of Goodness is of the nature of pleasure ; 
“ Apriti” (aversion) being (a form of) pain, the attribute of 
Foulness (Hajas) is of the nature of pain ; and, lastly, 
*• Viahdda" being (a form of) stupefaction, the attribute of 
Darkness is of the nature of stupefaction. The word ‘ Aimd’ 
is inserted in order to guard against the theory that pleasure 
is nothing more than mere negation of pain, and ziee verad. 
Fleasdi'e and pain are not negations of one another ; on the 
contrary, they are entities independent of one another. Thns 
means one whose existence (not non-existence) 
consists in love or pleasure ; “ viakdddtma’" and “ apritydtma'* 
may be similarly explained. The fact of pleasure and pain 
being entities by themselves, and not mere negations of one 
anotlier, is one of common experience. If they were mere 
mutual negations, they would be mutually dependent ; and 
thus the non-fulfilment of one would lead to that of the 
other. 


( 100 ). 


Their functions. 


Having thus described the nature of the Attribnt^, 
the author next lays down their several 
functions— “ They are aelapted to illumina- 



41 


[Wl] 


[F- xn.] 


- ti<m, acUviti/y and reitraint'* Here, too, the three members of 
tiK compoand are to be eonstraed in the same order as before. 
Fonbiess (B^ajas), in accordance with its active natnre, would 
alwayWnd everywhere be urging the buoyant Goodness - 
(Sattva) ^ action, if it were not restrained by the sluggish 
Darkness (Tamas) — ^by which restraint it operates only 
at times ; thus Darkness {Tamas) becomes a restraining 
agency. 

(101). Having thus laid down their fnnctions, the author 
lays down the method of their operation — 

their*operati»n^ ** Subdue and support, and produce 

one another, and consort together” “ Vritti” 
(action) is to be construed with each member of the compound. 
Now, to explain, “ Mutuallg subduing — ” The Attributes are 
so constituted thrft when one is brought to play, Ijy some 
external canse, it snbdnes the other ; e. g.. Goodness attains 
to its peaceful state only after having subdued Foulness and 
Darkness. Similarly do Passion and Darkness, in their turn, 
attain to their respective terrible and stupid conditions after 
having snbdued the other two. . '* 

Mutually supporting” — \^Anyonydsrdyavrittayah'\. — Though 
this statement as not applicable here, in the sense of the con- 
tainer and the contained, yet by ‘ support ’ l^Asraya) here is 
* meant something on which depends the action of another — ^as 
for instance, Goodness helps by its illuminative character, only 
when helped by Foulness and Darkness through their respec- 
tive properties of activity and restraint. [Or else Goodness 
by itself, without the touch of Foulness, would remain inert, 
and never be moved to action.] In the same manner do 
Passion and Darkness help respectively by their activity and 
rest^int only when supported by the functions of the other 
two. *'■ Producing each other" That is to say, one can 
produce (its effects) only when resting on the other two. By 
production here is meant development or modification, which is 
always of the same character as the parent Attribute which 
‘latter, therefore, are uncaused there being no possibility of 
' 6 



[102-^103] 


42 


[k; xm.] 

an 3 rthing differing in essence therefrom being the cause ; nor 
are they transient since they are never resolved into an esse^i- 
ally different cause. Consorting' together y Th at is tp* say 
they are mutual companions, not existing apart fpi^h one 
another. ^ has a collective force. In support of the^bove, we 
have the following : “ all (attr ibntes) are .mutual consorts ; 
all omnipresent ; Goodness is the consort of Passion, Passion 
of Goodness, both of these again of Darkness, which latter 
again of both. Goodness and Passion. The first conjunction 
or separation of these has never been perceived.” 


(102) . It has been said — “ Adapted^ to illumination activity ^ 
and restraint.” Now it is explained what those are that are 
adapted, .and wherefore are they so ? 

KAbikA XIII. 

Goodness is considered to be buoyant and illuminat- 
The three Attri- ing ; Foulness is exciting and versa- 
titoiiatSre^xpUhf- tile (mobile) ; Darkness, sluggish and 
enveloping. Their action, like a lamp, 
is for a (single) purpose.' 

(103) . Goodness alone is considered, by the masters of 

SAnkhya philosophy, to be buoyant and 
We properties o! illuminating. Buoyancy — as opposed to 
Goodness (Satwa). ginggighness— is the property to which the 

ascension of objects is due ; it is to this property that the 
rising flame of fire is due. In some cases. 
Buoyancy. property also brings about lateral 

motion, as in the case of air. Thus, generally, buoyancy jnay 
be said to be that property in the cause, which greatly helps 
its efficiency to its particular effects ; sluggishness, on the 
qther hand, would only dull the efficiency 
iiiuminativeness. Cause. The illuminative character 

of Goodness has already been explained (K&rikA XII). 



[ 104 — 106 ] , 


48 


[k, xin,] 


sity of the 
(jes of J*oul- 
— acti- 
vity an^^xciting- 
ness. ^ 



<104). Goodness and Darkness, being by themselves in- 
active, stand in need of a force, exciting 
their cansal operation ; this force is snp- 
plied by Foulness, which excites them and 
rouses them from their natural passivity, 
and urges them on to the accomplishment 
of their respective* effects. Hence, Foulness is said to be 
exciting. This exciting character of Foulness is next account- 
ed for — “ {it is also) versatile^' This also proves the 
existence of Foulness as a particular Attribute, being necessary 
for the sake of action. 


(106). • Foulness, in accordance with its versatility, would 
keep the triad of Attributes in a continuous 
of “krikt ^Wrl of activity, but for its being restrain- 
noss (Tamas)— slug- fid by the ** sluggish and enveloping” 

topin]^es&"** Attribute of Darkness, which thus limits 

the scope of its actions. Thus, in order to 
be distinguished from the active Foulness, Darkness has been 
said to be the restrainer — “ Darkness is sluggish and envelop- 
ing*' The particle Eva is to be construed — not only with, 
“ Darkness” — but with “ Goodness ” and “ Foulness ” also. 


(106). The enquirer objects : Instead of co-operating for 
a single purposib, the Attributes, being 
AttriktM * o£~con" endued as they are with contradictory* pro- 
trafiictory natures pertics, would counteract each other, like 
camft CO opera . opp(jge(j -wrestlers, (and thus there would 
be no effect emanating from them). The author replies — 
“ Like a lamp., their action is for a single purpose*' We have 
all observed how the wick and the oil, — 
titcy can, each, by itself, opposed to the action of 
in giving jigiit* firo — CO— Operate, when in contact with fire, 

* for the single purpose of giving light ; ■ 

and the Various humours of the body-wind, bile, and 
phlegm; — though possessed of contradictory properties, co- 
operate for the single purpose of sustaining the body. Pre- 
•cisely in the same manner, do the three Attributes, though. 



[107] 


44 


[ic** iidix*] 


possessed of mutually contradictory properties, co-operate 
towards a single end — the purpose (emancipation) of ^e 
Spirit. This will be farther explained in K4rik& XXXI>^ 
(107). To return to our original subject — PleasuB^, pain 


Necessity of pos- 
tulating the three 
Attributes^ as causes 
of pleasure, pain 
and delusion respec- 
tively. 


and delusion, opposed to one another, lead 
ns to threp diflferent canses connate with 
themselves respectively, (and as these 
canses we have postulated the three Attri- 
butes), These causes too must be multi- 


form, since, by their very nature, they are mutually sup- 
pressive. As an example of the multiform character of these 
various causes of pleasure, pain and delusion, we may have 
the following : A single girl, young, beautiful, gentle 
and virtuous, is a source of delight to her husband, because 
with regard to him she is born with her essence consisting in 
pleasure. She pains her co-wives, because with regard to 
them, she is born with her essence consisting in pain. And, 
lastly, the same girl stupefies another man who is unable to 
get at her, becanse with regard to him, she has her essence in 
delnsion. All the difierent forms — pleasure, &c., have been 
explained by this single instance of a woman. In the above case, 
that which is the cause of pleasure, is the 
of plciwnte^PoufncMs Attribute of Goodness which is essentially 
of pain, and Dark- made ui) of pleasure ; the canse of pain is 

nees of delusion. -c , • • • , , „ 

h onlness, consisting m pain ; and, lastly, 
the cause of delnsion is Darkness, consisting of delnsion. The 
properties, pleasure, illuminativeness, and buoyancy (belong- 
ing to Goodness) cannot be similarly said 

Tbe properties of ^ 

each of the Attri- to be mutually opposed, and thus incap- 

ti^ctory ”and'^°8o co-existing in a single Attribute, 

they do not neoes- As a matter of fact, we find them actually 
tiOT** of co-existing. Hence, pleasure, illnmina- 

• causes for each of tiveness, and buoyancy, being mutually 
■ ■ • consistent, do nob^iecessitate the assump- 


tion of different canses (for each of them severally) as do 
pleasnre,‘pain, and delnsion which are mutually opposed, (and 
as snch unable to co-herc in a single substratum). In the < 



45 


[108—109] 


[k. iir.J 


same manner, pain, versatility, and activity (properties of - 
^nlness), as also delnsion, slnggishness, and envelopingness 
(pSmerties of Darkness), do not lead to the assnmption of 
varidtii^anseB. Thtis ike triad of Att'rUmtea is established. 


(108). OIyeet{on : — Granted.all this. As'regards earth, &c., 
we actually perceive the properties of in- 
cteeS'°&cTofthe discreetness, &c., as belonging to them. 

® ^ But the Attributes, Goodness, and the 
* rest, can never come within the range of 

perceptible experience. And under such circumstances, how 
can we attribute to these latter, the properties of indiscreet- 
ness, objectivity, &c., (enumerated above) ? 

To this objection wc reply — 

• KAeikA XIV. 


- Indiscrectness and the rest are proved from the exis- 
Two reasons for tence of the three Attributes, and from 
utenM^of'^^naturo ^^6 absence of these (the three Attri- 
butes) in the reverse (of indiscrectness*, 
&c. i. e., Purusha). And the existence of the Unmani- 
fested (Nature) too is established on the ground of the 
properties of the effect (the Manifested) being consequent 
on those of the cause. 

(109). By “ a viveki ” in the Karikl is to be understood 
as ^dri' and *eka ' — in dvekayordvivachamik- 
amcharus'* [^Siddh&ntakaumudi I — ^iv — 22] — denote ‘‘dmtvP 
and ‘ ckatvd’ respectively ; or else it would be (*) “ dveMshu" 
(and not dvekayoh” i). It being asked — How do yon prove 
these, indiscreetness, &c. ? — ^the reply is : — “ From the exist- 
ence of the three Attributes” That is to say, we have found 


* ♦ For if the compound were aiaaljsqd into and the sum 

would be three, and would thus require a plural ending, and not the dual,-^ 
which is explained by making and stand for *^dvltva'^ and 

ekatva making only two nouns, and thus having a dual ending. 



46 


[Ki XIV*] 


[ 110 ] 


in common experience, with regard to the 

Fbst proof: ^roM perceptible material existence, that, whi 
the exiateme of the ^ ^ 0 • j 

three Attributes. ever consists of pleasure, &c., ^is quaked 

by indiscreetness, &c. The affirmatj^^ rea- 
soning, being explicit enough, is not stated in the^^'Karik&j 
which only^mentions the negative reason- 
ing From the absBTice of these in the 
theM in tlu) reverie reverse ” — ^that is to say, from the non-ex- 
( Spirit), istence of the Attributes in the Spirit which 

is the reverse of indiscreetness, &c. Or again, we may have 
the Manifested and the Unmanifested (both together) as the 
snbject (minor term) of the syllogism, and then we shall have 
the reasoning — '•'■From the existence of the three AttribiUes '^ — 
as a purely negative inference* (Avtta\ there being no other case 
(besides the minor term) where we conld have^ the agreement 
of the reason (Middle term — existence of the Attributes). 

(110). An objection is again raised — We grant all this ; 

but the existence of the properties — in- 
^QneBtion— How^s discreetness, &c., — cannot be proved before 
erist™ the object possessing these properties (the 

TJnmanifested) has been proved to exist 
To this we reply — “ From the properties of the effect being due to 
the properties of the cause.” The connection 
pnptrthi 7h! t)e thus explained : All effects are 

ejfeet h-ing 'due to seen to possess properties similar to those of 

thoteoftlie cav»e. ,, , ^ ‘ it. n xi » .j 

their respective causes, as the cloth of the 


* The syllogism has previously been explained as — “ Whatever has plea- 
sure, &c., is indiscreet, the perceptible material substances — and here 
we hand the agreement of the reason in the “perceptible sub- 

stances” whose connotation is different from that of the subject of the 
fiyllogism, “ All tlr ngs having pleasure, &c.” Now what our author proposes 
is that wc might explain th c reasoning thus : “ All things besides the 
spirit (the Manifested and the Unmanifestea) are indiscreet, since they 
possess the three Attributes, and whatever is not indiscreet does not possess 
*he three attributes." Thus in the latter syllogism wo have tot the minor 
term TJie Mamfesteil arid the Uunra^ifestcd which comprehend all casea^ 
where the reason (the presence of the three attributes) could be found ; fetf 
nothing besides the Manifested and the Unmanifested can be said to have 
the three Attributes. 



47 


[ 111 } 


[K. XIV.] 


threads. Similarly we mnst admit that pleasure, &c., being - 
properties of Conscionsness (Mahat), &c., most be the 
onotome of similar properties subsisting in their cause. [And 
this is no other than Nature.] And thus we have 

proved tne existence of Nature, as possessed of the properties 
of pleasure, pain, and delusion.* , 


(111). “1 grant all this”, says the enquirer ; “but the 
followers of KanMa (the Vaiseshikas) and 
thratom”c''theo^- Gautama (the Naydyikas) assert thepro- 
which discartls the duction of the Manifested, Earth, and the 
nStetcd«Ttity ?' l^om the binary compound downward — 

from homogeneous atoms, which too are 
manifested. The various properties in the effects owe their 
existence to sinular properties in the primary atom8.t And 

♦ And consefiuently Nature too is proved to have indiscreetness, &c., in 
accordance with the proposition laid down before — whatever has pleasure, 
&c. , has indiscreetness, &c*, also.*’ The reasoning may bo rendered clearer by 
reducing it to the form of two Aristotelian syllogisms : — 

f Properties of the effect (Intellect) are properties of the cause (Nature). 

Pleasure, &c., are properties of the effect (Intellect). 

1 Pleasure, &c., are properties of the cause (Nature.) 

And again ; — 

f Whatever has pleasure, &c., has indiscreetness, &c, 

-J Nature has pleasure, &c., (as first proved). 

( Nature has indiscreetness, &c. 

*f,It will, I think, not be out of place here, to indicate, in brief, the atomic 
theory of Kandda and Gautama, — which may be thus summed up. — In the 
beginning there existed only atoms of various substances (Earth, Water, Fire 
and Air) besides, of course, Akdsa, &c., which are in themselves eternal. These 
various atoms were respectively endued with four different sets of properties, 
latterly perceived in their compounds. By some agency or other — mainly 
that of “ Adrishta,” the Unseen (Fate) — ^all homogeneous atoms combine, one 
with one, into couples and thus form binary compounds, which latter again 
conjbining in the same manner, but three at a time, give rise to tertiary com- 
pounds, and so on to the various objects of perception. These atoms arc de- 
clared to be Vithout extension in space, or else they could not be permanent. 
•But, as far as 1 know, no Naydyika ^has even yet tried to show how two 
filings devoid of extension, can combine — a point which affords the strongest 
handle to S'ankarachdrya in his refutation of the atomic theory,— See 
S^Mraka-BhAshya on the Brahmar’Svtra9 II — ii— 12/17. 




48 


[112J 


[e. XV.] 


tbns finding the prodnction of the Manifested from the 
> Manifested, quite explicable, what is the use of postulating an 
Unmanifested, an imperceptible Entity (in the forn}^ of 
Nature) ?” 


We reply — 


KArikA XV. 

From the finite nature of specific objects, fi-om 
Reply— wo must homogeneity, from evolution being 
Manifested Beality— to active (causal) energy, from the 

Beasona given. Separation of cause and effect, and 

from the undividedness (resolutiony of the whole uni- 
verse. 


First proof of the 
existence of Prakriti- 
^^Sinae there is separa^ 
tion of cause wild ef- 
fect, wjul Te-9inion of 
the whole Universe,'^ 


( 112 ). Of specific objects, the primary cause is the Uu- 
manifested (Nature). Because (1) “ There 
is separation of cause and effect, and re- 
solution of the whole Universe.” It has 
already been proved (in Eurika IX) that 
the effect subsists (in its unmanifested 
form) in the cause ; as the limbs of the tortoise, coming out 
of its body, are perceived 'as separate from the body, which 
again they enter and thus disappear (from view). In the 
same manner, the various objects, jar, &c., are perceived, as 
different from their causes, clay, &c., when they come ont of 
these («. e., are produced from them when they have their 
existence, as the jar manifested out of the lump of clay, 
wherein they have all along inhered.) The same is the .case 
with earth, &c., as effects of the primary elements, with these 
latter again as efiects of Self-consciousness (Ahank&ra) ; 
this latter again as that of Consciousness and lastly, with this 
last again as the effect of the Unmanifested, which Is the final 
cause. This separation, from the final cause (the Unmanifested)', 
of the various effects — either mediately (as with earth, &c.,) 
or immediately (as with Consciousness) — related to it, is 



[113a_114] 


49 


[k. XV.] 

what is meant by the separation of the cause and the effect In 
the same manner, at every dissolution, the various grades of 
effects — (l)iEarth,&c., (2) The Primary Elements, (3) Self- 
consci^^nesB and (4) Intellect — lose themselves in their 
respective immediate causes — (1) Primary Elements (2) 
Self-consciousness, (3) Intellect* and (4) the Unmanifested 
Nature. Thus we see that it is only a certain form of the 
cause which becomes imjierceptible (at dissolution^ as far as a 
particular effect is concerned. Ascending in the same order 
as before, we find the various effects up to Will disappearing 
in their respective immediate causes — ^up to the Final Un- 
manifestdtl — and tlius rendering these latter imperceptible, 
— at least that form of the cause which concerns each of 
them severally. Of this unmauifested, however there is 
no further recexjtacle ; and thus it becomes the receptacle — 
and hence an aggregate of the uninanifcsted states — of all 
the effects. This is what is meant by the re-imion (in the final 
U nraanifosted) of the whole Unicerse, In Vaiswarupya^thQ 
affix ^S 2 n?i has a reflexive sense. 

(113). Because Ecolutlon is due to Energy, *’ — It is n 
well-known fact that the Evolution of the 

Second proof: ‘‘Rf- effect is due to theactivc energy of the cause; 
to for ccrtaiuly, iio*effoct can arise from an 

inefficient cause. This latent energy in the 
cause is no other tlian the existence therein of the effect in its 
iinmanifested state ; since, on the hypothesis of the effect be- 
ing an entity, tliere can be no other form of causal energy. 
The diflerence of sand from sesamum — the material cause of 
oil — lies only in the fact that it is only in the latter that oil 
exists in its unmanifested condition. 

(12.4). Objection : Granted all this : — But the above two 
reasons that you have urged might very well 

Objection:* These rest with the Will— what is the use of 
two reasons nijght , « • . 

i-eat with Intellect, assuming a further Unmanifested Reality ? 

We reply; (3) Frow, Jiniteness'^^ — i, e,, 
'from the fact of the cflects being, in their very nature 

7 



[k. XV.] 


[115] 


50 


finite. (In support of his ground, the author puts forth a 
syllocism). The specific objects in ques- 
— “on, Will and the rest have a^n Unmani- 
(of all manifested fested Entity for their cause they 

have a cause in which they exist in their 
unmanifested state), since, they are finite, as jar, &c. The finite 
objects, jar, &c., as commonly seen, have, for their canse, 
clay, &c., (in which inhere) the unmanifested (state of the 
effects); since we have already shown that the canse is no- 
thing more than the unmanifested condition of the effect. 
And under these circumstances, the cause of Will must 
be the Unmanifested which must be the Jinal cause, for 
there is no ground for postulating a further Unmanifested 
Reality.* 


(115). '"'‘Became of homogeneity f — Homogeneity consists 
in the similarity of different objects. In- 

Fourttiproof— “ B«- tellect, and the rest — manifesting them- 
oa‘ttseqfhomoaeneity. , , - . o ± 

selves as ascertainment, (fee. — are seen to 
be similarly related to pleasure, pain and delusion. And 
^Sliatever is invariably connected with a certain form must 
have, for its canse (wherein it inheres), something which has 
that form for its constituent element. Thus it is decided that of 
the specific objects, the Uhnmnifested (Nature) is the cause.! 


Having proved the existence of the Unmanifested, the 
author next states the method of its operation — 

* Because the Unniaiiifcstcfl Nature (the cause oC Will is not finite, as 
its effects, Consciousness aiul the rest arc. And further, because, by so 
doing wc would have to postulate causes ad uifinitiun, 

t 

f Thus we have iu the present case: Will and the rest arc invariably 
connected, with pleasiin?, pain and delusion; and, as sacli, niusfc have, for 
their cause, Nature wherein they alh lie unmanifested prior to their Evolu- 
tion; and this Nature has, for its Constituent Elements, the three Attributea 
which respectively consist in pleasure, paiu and delusion. 



[ 116 — 118 ] 


51 


[k. XVI.] 


KAmkA XVI. 

' 'Xhe Unmanifested is the cause ; it operates through 
the three Attributes by blending and 
tuJs o^r^n!^ naodification, as water, on account 

.of the difference arising from the 
receptacle of the Attributes, as they are variously 
distributed. 

(116) . • “ Operates, — At the time of cosmic dissolution, 

the three Attributes continue to be of 
modifications. Modified condition 
forma a part of the nature of the Attri- 
butes ; and as such they can never, for a moment, remain 
inert. Thus at the time of dissolution, the Attributes operate 
through their reSpective forms of Goodness, Foulness and 
Darkness*. 

(117) . Another method of operation is next stated — “ By 

blending^ — This “ blending ” of the Attri- 
the AttributOT”^ butes, however, is not possible without the 
relation of subserviency among them, anS 
this subserviency again is due to a diversity among the Attri- 
butes — which diversity again is not possible without des- 
tructibility (e. e., unless the Attributes are so constituted that 
they suppress one another). Thus the second methbd of 
operation is through development into Will &c.t 

(118) . Tlie enquirer objects — How can diverse methods of 
Objection— How operation belong? to an Attributes which 

can an Attribute of ^ 

uniformnature bring have been declared to be of uniform nature ? 
t^s^? We reply — ‘‘ By modification — as water ” — 

we all know how the water falling from the clouds, though 

♦ ^hia is the state of equilibrium of the Attributes, during which no 
evolution is possible. 

•f The various evolutions from Nature ^are clue to the disturbance of eqnilN 
brtum among the Attributes, which rouses the hitherto dormant, evolving 
energy of Nature/ whence issue forth the various manifestations — Intellect and 
• the rest. 



[k. XVII.] 


[ 119 — 120 ] 52 

naturally of itself, having one taste,* becomes sweet, bitter, 
sour, &c., according as it comes into 
contact with different modiffcations of 
earth — such as cocoanut, wood-ap’;ib, &c. 
In the same manner, owing to the blending and the mutual 
suppression of the Attributes, the Attributes occupying 
a subordinate position base themselves on the prominent one, 
and thus give rise to diverse forms of cosmic manifestations. 
Hence it is laid down — “ On account of the difference arising 
from the receptacle of the various Attributes” 


<119). Now the existence of the Spirit (Purnsha) is laid 
down, in opposition to those self-coutented (Materialists) who 
accept as spirit either Nature or Intellect, or Self-conscious- 
ness, or the sense-organs, or (lastly) the elements. 

KAuikA XVII. 

Since all composite (or compound) objects are for 
anothei'’s use; since the reverse of 
exTs“ possesses) the three Attri- 

butes with other properties (must 
exist) ; since there must be super-intendence ; since 
there must be one to enjoy (experience or feel) ; and 
since there is a tendency towards final beatitude 
(abstraction of the Spirit from material existence) ; — 
therefore Spirit exists. 

The spirit exists: ci-«i • l j . j * 

because ail com- Spirit exists, apart from Primordial 

pound objects are Matter (Nature) : — 
for another. ' ^ 

(120). “ Because all compound objects (objects made up of 
integral component parts) are for anoiher'^s use,^* — This 
reason, when reduced to the syllogistic form, would stand 


♦ ‘ Sweet ’—according the Nayayikas. 




[ 121 } 


53 


[k. xvn,] 


thus — ^Nature, Intellect and the rest exist for another’s use, 
because they are compounds, as chair, bed, &c,, and these 
latter are all compound, inasmuch as they are made up of 
pleasulf^ pain and delusion.* 


(121). But, says the objector, the compound objects chair, 
’ &c., are seen to exist for other objects 

Objection : The , . , , i i , 

above reasoning? whicli too are compoDiid, siicii as men s 
orcot^ bodies and not for tlie sake of Spirit as 
pounds not to an Eic- apart from Matter (the body). And as 
mentary Spirit. Natnrc, &c., being compounds, 

should oi^ly lead to the inference of another set of compound 
substances (for whose use they exist) and not to that of an 
Elementary Non-compound Spirit (an “ End-in-itself.’') We 


reply — “ Smee the reverse of that which possesses the three 


R e p 1 y — tS inoe 
thv rfirnrsr. of timt 


Attributes and other properties must exists 
— That is to say, if from the fact of 


wMfh pos»c»m» the Nature, &c., being for another’s use, we 

thvKe AUnhuteimuH - n , •. 

exist. were to infer only another compound sub- 


stance, then in that case we would have to 
ob^to/wouM*^ assume such compounds ad injinitum ; ftjr 
to compounds ad inr cvcu this latter Compound must lead to 
jimtum. another for whose use it will exist and this 


again to another, and so on ad nnjinitum. And when we 
can escape this regressus ad injinitum by postnlat*ing a 
reasonable resting ground, it is certainly, not proper to 
multiply unnecessary assumptions (in the shape of com- 
pounds ad infinitum). Nor can it he urged that multiplica- 
tion of assumptions becomes excusable when supported by 
proofs ; for in the above inference the application of the 
instance ought to he extended only so far as “existing 
for another's use ” is concerned ; it can bo extended no 
fnrCher. And we have explained in the NyAyavdrtilta^ 


* This sounds rather absurd. But wc must not forget that the wliole 
SKPt of material objects are mere emanations from Nature, whose constituent 
elements are the three Attributes, which latter consist in pleasure, pain and 
delusiop, respectively. 



[ 122 ] 


: |k. xvn.] 


fi4 

tdtparyalika* that if the complete identification of every 
phase of the cited instance were to be looked fdr in the sub- 
ject in question, then there could be no reasonin|; l!;^inference.t 
Thus then, in order to escape the regresms ad 
if we accept the uon-compound nature of Spirit, we und our- 
selves constrained to attribnta to it the properties of “ being 
without the three Attributes,” “ discreetness,” “ non-objectivi- 
ty ” (subjectivity), “ uncommonality ” {i. e., specific character), 

intelligence ” and “ unprolificness ” (inability to produce). 
For, these properties are invariably accompanied by that of 
compoundness, which latter being absent in spirit, must lead 
to the inference of the absence of the three Attribnteft, &c., as 
when a certain individual is not a Brahmana, he can never be 
a Katha (a special class of Brahmans). Hence the author — 
when he laid down that “ the reverse of that .which possesses 
the three Attributes, &c., must exist ” — implied that this 
something which would be “ the reverse, &c.” must be an in- 
dependent Elementary Entity — an “ End-in-itself.” And 
this is Spirit. 

*(122). For the following reason also there must be a 
Spirit apart from Matter ; Because there 

be®uArintende“cr Superintendence:' That is to say, 

because the objects constituted by the three 

• This is a commentary on the NyAyavartika (a gloss on the Nyayasutras 
of Gautama) of Udyotahara by V^chaspati Misra, This work with the 
Parisuddhi of udayanacharya is generally counted as closing the epoch of 
ancient Nyfi.ya, — latterly supplanted by the modern system, introduced and 
most extensively expounded by Gaiigesa Upddhyaya, in his Tattwa- 
ChintHmani. 

I Because there can scarcely be found any two occurrences in nature, 
which could be quite iileiitieal. Bven in the stock example of the Naiyay^ikas 
— “ Fiery, because smoking, as the culinary hearth ” — we have a dissimilarity 
between the subject-matter of the syllogism and the inst ance cited. Thus, in, 
the culinary hearth the fire is for cooking footi, and proceeding from a house 
made by men, Jee,, &c., whereas such is not the case with the fire in the 
mountain* 



[123^124] 


55 


[k. XVII.] 


Attribates are snch as necessitate the existence of a superin- 
tendent. For, everything consisting in pleasure, pain and 
delusion, is , seen to be superintended over by something else 
chariot by the charioteer ; and Intellect and the 
rest have been proved to consist in pleasure, pain and delu- 
sion ; therefore, they must have a supervisor, — and this super- 
visor must be beyond* the three Attributes and independent, 
an “ End-in-itself ” — and this is Spirit. 

(123) . Again the Spirit exists “ because there must be, one 

to experience (or feel)" — That is to say, 

pleasure and 

pain as something to be felt — as agreeable 
or the reverse ; and as snch there must be some substance, 
beyond the feelings themselves, to which they (feelings) can 
be agreeable or otherwise. Feelings cannot be pleasurable 
to the Intellect (Buddhi), &c., for that would imply self-con- 
tradictory actions, inasmuch as the Intellect and the rest are 
integrally composed of pleasure, pain and delusion.f Thus, 
then, something else, independent of pleasure, &c., must Jip 
the agent who feels — and this is Spirit. 

(124) . Others, however, interj^ret the above reasoning of 

the Karika thus : Bhogya (enjoyable) 
visible', and the visibility of Buddhi 
abow'^son. ^ ** ami the rest not being possible without an 

observer, there must be one outside of, and 
beyond. Intellect, &c., — and this is Spirit. The visibility of 

* Otherwise the supervisor also will stand in need of another, for the pre- 
sence of the Attribnte.s in the former will necessarily lead to that oE pleasure, 
&c,, which again will necessitate its superintendence by something beyond 
itscli And so we shall be landed in a regressm ad infiiiitunu 

t 

^ f That is to .say— Intellect, as made up of pleasure, pain find dulncss, can- 
not be properly said to feel pleasure, Ac.,* for that would imply the feeling of 
plfioJtare by pleasure j— or worse still — by pain ; and vice vermy which is 
absurd. 



56 


[125] 


[k. xvm.] 


Intellect and the rest can be inferred from the fact of their 
being made up of pleasure, &c., as earth, &c. 

(126). Lastly, Spirit exists — “ because there is a^lmdency 
towards action for final beatitude^ — The 
beatitude, treated of in all the systems 
xoiieit towards heati- of philosophy, and mentioned by tlie great 
^ sages of divine insight — as the absolute and 

final alleviation of the three kinds of pain — can never apply 
to Intellect, <tc. ; for, these have by their very nature, pain as 
one of their integral components, from which, therefore, they 
can never be absolved ; since a substance cannot be absolved 
of something* forming its constituting element. Thus then, 
there must be somotliing independent of pleasure, &c., where- 
from pain could be expunged. OonsecpicTitly, as the various 
systems of philosophy have all along aimed at beatitude, 
therefore, there exists something beyond (pleasure, &c., and 
hence) Intellect and the rest — and this is Spirit. 


Having thus proved the existence of S^urit, the author next 
raises the (picstion — Is this spirit one (*) (manifesting itself) 
in all bodies, or many, being diflereut in different, bodies ? 
And ill reply, he lays down the theory of the plurality of 


KakikA XVIII. 


From allotment of birth, death, and the organs ; 

(2) from the non-simultaneity of action.s 
— different individuals) ; and (3) 
from the tUfferent modifications of the 
Attributes — the plurality of Spirits is established. 


‘‘ The plurality of Spirits is establis/mV — How ? 


As the Vcdaiilin asserts. 



[127—128] 57 [k. xvni.J; 

(127). “ From allotment of births death and the organs .^* — 

Rirth of tlie Spirit consists in its relation 
From aiiohnnu with the bodv thc sGiisc-orf^aus, Self-con- 

of birth, dram and . i t-i i- * 

iiworga 7 \^ scioiisness, Avill and Feeling* {vedana) 

— all these latter fonnirig into an aggre- 
gate of a particular (diameter. . This is what is meant by 
birth — which does not nieari modification : since the Spirit is 
essentially unmodifiable (iinchaugeable). And death too 
consists ill tlie departare from the body, of the Spirit, which 
cannot be destroyed, since it is eternal. The organs^' are 
thirteen, biiginuing with the Will. The (diversified) 
of these — births, &c. — is not explicable on the 
hypothesis of t!ie unity of Spirit. For, if the Spirit were one 
(ill all bodies), the birth, death, blindness or madness of one 
individual woald,lead to exactly the same effects in others. 
The several allotment, Iiovvever, becomes (piite consistent 
with the theory of the jdiirality of Spirits. Nor ca*n 
the Monist explain the above difference by attribut- 
ing it to the Spirit, as conditioiKHl by contact with 
diftereiit bodies, &.c, b'or in that casij he would land himself 
on another absurdity — that of attributing birth or death in 
accordance witli the different parts of the body! — which can 
never be. For a woman is not said to be born or dead, by 
the mere development or derangenient of certain porticiiis of 


her body. 

( 128 ). 


*’ Shirr- artir-ity u 
7U)t nmnltanrousF 


For the following reason also, the Spirit is different 
with different individuals : “ Since actimty 
is not simnltaneoiisF Action, in tlie form 
of endeavour, is a function of the internal 
organs ; still it is here attributed to the Spirit. If the Spirit 
were one, tlic activity of one <iiiaii would load to similar 
activity in all otlior men ; and thus the motioii of one would 


* Vodanff' nii^^hL 1)3 tako'i s.3vcr;illy with “ l)oily,” In thai case the 
passajje woulii bj traiisIa^nU thus — ‘‘bodily, sfjnsiioii.s, mental, ejijoisfic and 
intellectual coffriitious’* ; but thc translAtion given above in preferable: for 
certainly, tliere can b: )io cognition Miroagh ho ly. taken singly. No 
cognition is possible in the bo<ly alone, wiOiout the aid of (ilic ronsc-orgaus) 
mind, Ac., arid so on )vith tlic icil. 

H 



[ 129 — 132 ] 


68 


[Ki SIX.] 


lead to that of all others — a palpable absurdity, which is ex- 
plained away quite reasonably, on the hypothesis of plurality. 

(129). ' Again, the Spirits are many — “ because the modi- 
fications of the Attributes are diffirent ” — 
^of ”* tho Some persons abounding in the attribute 
Attributes arc clifEer- of Goodness, represent aggregates of that 
attribute — e. g. the gods and saints. 
Others abound in Foulness — such are men. The rest abound 
in Darkness — and these are the beasts. This diversity in the 
distribution of Attributes could not be explained if the Spirit 
were one. The hypothesis of plurality, however, ^ makes it^ 
quite explicable. 

(180). Having thus established the plurality of Spirits the 
author, now states their properties — a knowledge of which is 
conducive to discriminative knowledge (wisdom) : — 

KAiukA XIX. 

. And from that contrast (before set forth) it follows 
that the Spirit is Avitness, and has final 
eniancipation, neutrality, and is per- 
ceiving and inactive. 

“ And ” connects the following projierties of the Spirit with 
its plurality. 

(131). If it were said — “ And from this contrast,” then it 
would refer to the various distrihution of 
Why that contrast. Attributes, of the last Karikd,. In 

order to avoid this, it is gaid — “ and from that, &c.” A 
subject, immediately preceding, is referred to by the pronoun 
this ; whereas one not so immediate is denoted by that ; 
hence the that here refers to Kftrikft XL 

(138). Thus, then, the contrast of “having the three 
Attributes, &c.,’’ connotes the Spirit’s property of being with- 
out the three Attributes, and being discriminative, non- 



59 


[133-135] 


[k. XIX.] 


objective, singular, intelligent and non-i>rodnctive. Novr, 
the properties of being a vHtness and perceptive are 
necessaiy accompaniments of intelligence 
so many pioperties. and non—objectivity . Since an intelli*- 

^Their iuter-depend- gg^<; ijging aloue can be a spectator, 

•and one can be a witness only when the 
objects have been shown to him ; as in daily life wo find the 
two parties of a dispute showing and explaining their various 
objects and reasons to the witness ; similarly does tlie Pi'a- 
kriti exliibit its creations before the Spirit, which latter, there- 
■ fore, becomes the loitness. And agaiti no object can be shown 
to one, hirhself an object and non-intelligeut ; and since the 
Spirit is both intelligent and non-objective, it becomes the 
tmtneas. For the same reasons, the Spirit is perceieing. 

(133) . Farther, the al>sence of t]>e three Attrihntes leads to 
jiml emanci-pation — by which is meant the final and absolute 
removal of pain ; ami this property, as belonging to the spirit, 
is a necessary dediu^tion from the fact of the soul being 
naturally withouti tlie tliree Attributes, and lienee without 
pleasure, pain or dulness. 

(134) . From the absence of Attributes, again, f()llow8 
netUraliUj ; since this latter proj)ei’4y is such as (iiinnot belong 
either to the happy and satisfied, or to tlie sad and grumbling*. 
It is only one who is devoid of Ixitli pleasure and pain, who 
can be called neutral — also called IJddsuia (indifTerent). 
Lastly, the proi>erty of inurtimly is a necessary outcome of 
the properties of non-productiveness and discriminativeiiess. 
(wisdom). The inactivity of the Spirit is inferred from ita 
wisdom and nou-prcKluctivc cbaraciter. 


(1S5). ;---We grant all this: but in our daily 

life we first decide oiir duty and then we 
think in the tbllowing strain — ‘I, who am 
always found ail intelligent being, wish to act.’ Thus, 

then, we find intelligence an<i activity co- 



[ 136 — 138 ] 


6rt 


[k. XX — ^^XXT.] 


existent. And tins goes ngninst tlie Sanklija tenets wliieli 
make intelligence devoid of activity and wr rcrxa. 

We reply : — 

Kakjka XX. 

„ , TJuis, from this union the uuiiitelli- 

Beply:— The appa- ’ 

rent acUvity of the rrent Utiija (Buddiji, &c.,) appears as 

souUiue to union wMtli y * . . 

Bmidhi.aiKit.hoapiKi- iiiteilio'eut ; and from tlie activity of 

rent intelligoneci of ^ ^ ^ ^ • • 

the latter due to the Attributes, the indifferent Spirit 

union with Pnrii.«!lui. 

appears as an (active) agent. 

(136). Sinc(j intolliproTiee and aettivity Itave been proved to 
be differently kxmted, tlierefore, the feeling referred to by 
the objector innst be a ruistala^ Tln^ woi*d Linga includes 
everything from tlie down to the primary elements"*- 

to be described later on. The cause of‘ the iixistake is said to 
be the union or proximity of the Spirit with tlm Lingu. 
(Biiddlii and tlie rest). 

Tlie rest is clear cnongh. 

,(137). OhjvctUm X — Yon say that the feeling is due to 
imion^ (fv. But no union is possilile with- 
C»)j(.H^fcioTl— AVhnt some need wliicth, agnin, is not possible 

innoii ^ without the relation of the helper and the 
ludpcMl. How is this ])o.ssihle in accordance 
■with your tenets, with regard to the union of Mu' Spirit with 
the Lhiffa ? 

In reply, the author lays down the grounds of neech-- 

Kaiuka XXI. 

For the Spirits eonteniplatioii of IVrakriti, and its 
final Fniancipalbm, the union of both 
Rpply — Th(* ncc<l tal <cs place, like that of tlie halt and 

EmaiHd{>.ati'.’.ii. ‘ t.lu; blind ; au<l from this iinion pro- 
ceeds creation. 

(138). In “ Fradhanasya.^’ the genitive affix has tfce 
objective force, the meaning being — “ for the eoufceinplation 
bv Spirit of Xatnre.” — thus implying the fact of Nature being 



[130— 141] 


61 


[K. xxn.] 

an object — sometlving to bo enjoyed, lint tliis enjoy abilitj- 
is not ])ossible without an enjoyer. whose exishnice thus 
becomes necessary, for thsit of Nature*. 

(139> The author next lays dow'ii the "round of tlie 
Spirit’s need — “ For f/ir Fmanripafion of 

The need oxpkincd. . 

with tho enjoyable Nature, believes tlie three kind of pains — 
the constituents of Nature — to be his own ; and from tin's 
self-imposed bond he seeks liberation — wbicl) can result only 
from wisdom discriminating between the Spirit and tlie three 
Attributes — which Avisdom thus becomes impossible witliont* 
the knowledge; ami hence the existence, of Nature. Thus 
then we find the Spirit standing in need of Nature, for his 
emancipation. Since the relation (of Spirit with Nature) is 
eternal, therefoi'i!, it is quite proper that tlie Spirit should he 
related to Nature for emancifiation. though primarily, the 
relation Avas for enjoyment only. 

(140) . (S ranted all this relation — But Avhomie. tho creation 
of Bnddlii, &c.? 

We reply — From, t/r/s tiruon proceed ?> crmUonF The 
relation (of vSpirit Avitli Nature) cannot by 
Tho ncocsisity of itself siifUce either for enjovm(*nt or eman- 

the Croat ionof Bu<l- • i n • i 

ci]iatioii, if ther» Avtu’c no Iniddlu and the ^ 

rest ; under tho circumstances ih^iunon 

itself brings about the creation, for the sake — primarily -of 

enjWimnit, ami finally, of emancipation. 

The jirocess of in*eatioii is now dcscrilx'd — 

Kaiuka XXII. 

From Prakrit! issues Mahat (or Biuldbi) ; from this 
Mahat again issues Self-(*()nsei<msiics.s 

^10 procpi^s rjf 
Kvouition from iVa- 

i>vsimr,vnLs. sixtceii ; from five of these 

^xteen, proceed the five "ross elements. 

(141) . From Prakrift^ — Prahriti is a name of the 
Unmaiiifestod Prineiph^ ; * Mffhrrt nml Ahttnkdra will he 


(A hankfira), in )iii avI i ich pn xrofxls 



[ 142 — 143 ] 


[k. xxiii.] 


62 

described later on, as also the set of sixteen, made np of the 
eleven sense-organs and tlie live primary elements. Out of 
these sixteen, from the five primary elements, proceed respect- 
ively the five gross ones — Akftsa, Eartli, / 

(142). Thus, from the primary element of sound proceeds 
Al^usa, having sound as its characteristics 
The process of the property ; similarly from the mixture of 
elements. the primary elements of tonch and sound, 

proceeds Air, with sontid and touch as ita 
cliaracteristic properties ; again, from the mixture of the 
primary elements of sonnd, tonch and colour, proceeds Light, 
with sonnd, touch and colour for its characteristic properties ; 
and from the mixture of the primary elements, of sound, 
touch, colour and taste, proceeds Water, with sound, touch, 
colour, and taste as its characteristic properties ; and lastly, 
from the mixture of tlie primary element of snicdl with 
that of the last four, proceeds Earth, with all the live for its 
cliaracteristic properties. 


tl43). The Uumanifested Principle luas been delined in 
general terms in Karika X, and speinfically in Ivarika XIII ; 
the Manifested also has been generally defined in KarikS, X ; 
now the author defines a particular Manifested Principle — 
the B'mldhi — 

Kaiuka xxiii. 


Biiddlii is 


B add hi define* 1. Its 
properties stated. 


file determiniug Principle (Will)* ; 
Virtue, Wisdom, Disjiassion and Power 
constitute its form (when affected by 
Goodness), and the reverse of these 


when atfccted by Darkness. 


* Though there is some diilerence of opinion on this point, yet I am’ 
inclined to think that Adhyamisaya uneans * determining,’ and of all the 
faculties wUl appears to be the only determining principle in Man. Hence- 
forth Buddhi will be translated as Willy and the reader is requested to mark 
the same change in tin* foregoing pages. 



[144—146] 63 [K. xxiti.] 


(144). “ BuddJii is determination ” — Since there is no 
difference between the aiction and the 

BttddhfSSScd.'’* Everyone, 

when he comes across something to be 

(ione, thinks that he is deputed to the work and, finally, deter- 
mines that it is hijs duty, and tlwis acts towards its accom- 
plishment. This determination of the dnty is the charateri- 
stic property of BiiddU — which appears as if endued with 
intelligence by contact with the intelligence of the Spirit. 
Buddhi, again, is non-different from determination, which 
thus forms its definition, inasmuch as it serves to distinguish 
it from similar as well as dissimilar substances. 


The properties of* 
Buddhi- Virtue, Wis- 
dom, Dispassioti and 
Power, and the re- 
Tcrse of these. 


(145). Having thns defined Buddhi, the anthor next 
states its properties, in order to help the 
attainment of true wisdom — “ Virtue" &c., 
Virtne leads to (worldly) prosperity, as 
well as to Snper-physical bliss, — thit 
brought about by the performance of ‘ 
sacrifices &(•,. leading to the former, and that dne to the eight- 
fold practice of Voga leading to the latter. Wisdom consiets 
in the knowledge of the difference between the Attributes (as 
constituting Nature) and the Spirit. Dispassion is absence 
of passion. » 


(146). *This Dispassion is of four kinds — Yatam&na-San- 
• jnd Vgatii'eka-Sanjnd, Ekendriyd-Sanjnd 

dis^^imi The passion — na- 

turally impure — residing in the mind, lead 
the different senscs-organs to action. The effort to put a stop 
to this action of the senses is named Yatamdna-Sanjnd (li- 
terally, effort). When this process of resistance is once begun, 
son^e passions will have been suppressed before others ; then 
the discrimination of these from those still operating is called 
Vyatireka-Sanjnd. When the senses have been disabled, then 
the passions that have been su]5pressed reside in the mind in 


Cf, Bhaihya on Yogasutra 1—15 



G4 


[k. XXIILJ 


the I oral of mere anxiety — and this is know a as Ekendrijfd- 
Sanjnd. The sappression of even tliis anxiety towards all 
perceptible objects, — the ordinary ones, as well as^thoso men- 
tioned in the Veda,— is called an(lis^snperior 

to the first three ; this has been thus described by the revered 
Patanjali; “The dispassion iHuned Fasi/irl7^-Sanj7^yu belongs 
to one who lias no desire for either visible or Vedic objects.” 
[Yoga-Sntra I, 15]. 

( 147 ). This is Dlspassion, a pro[)erl;y of Biiddhi. Powder 
also is a property of Bnddhi ; an it is to 
The eight kinds of ])erfectious Attenuation and 

the rest (Anima^ &c.) are due.* Of these 
(1) Aninid {Lit Atomic character) the is the jiroperty by 
which one can enter the densest substances, sucli as 
stones. (2) Layhivid (Buoyancy) is that to wdiich is 
due the ability to traverse solar regions liy means of the 
snii^s rays. (3) GarimA (Gravity) leads to heaviness ; 
•and (4) /l/?^/^/m((Trandenr) causes supremacy. To (b) Approach 
is due the ability to toindi the moon with the lingers. (G) 
Fii^lfdment of desires is such as can enable one to dip into the 
earth as in water. (7) Vasitwa leads to the subordination of 
all objects to the devotee. iSupreiiiacy brings about mastery 
over all objects. (<S) Jnfailihiliftj of purpose is such that all 
object?; follow the (U)urse dictated by the wull of the devotee. 
The decisions of onlijiary mortals follow the course of ovcrits, 
whereas tliose of a trained devotee precede them and dictate 
their course. 

^ ( 148 ). These four are the properties of Buddhi, partaking 
of the attribute of Goodness. Those partaking of the 
attribute of Darkm^ss arc the reverse of those — viz , : Sin 
Ignorance, Passion and AVcakiiess or Fallibility. < 


♦ There is some coTtfusioii as <u the number of these perfections. As emt- 
'merateil here, they apticar ri'ni'". but tliey ought <o be chjhi oxi\y henoe I 
have taken luui LiUfA'.a its one. 



[149-*— 151] 66 [k. XXIV — xxv.] 

The author next defines Egoism or Self-conscioosnes* 
(Ahank&ra). 

KIrikA XXIV. 

Egoism is self-consciousness ; thence 

The principle of 

AhankAra defined, proceeds a two-iold Creation,— ‘tlie set 
of eleven and the five primary elements. 

(140). ‘‘^Egoiim is self-consciomness " — and this Self>con> 
Bcionsness is perceptible in such ideas as — “ The object I have 
observed and known,” “ none bat myself has power over this 
and that,” “ I exist,” &c. All this is the characteristic action 
of the pivnciple of Egoism, on which the Baddhi depends for 
its determinative function in sneh decisions as “ this is to be 
done by me." 

(160) . The different products of this effect are next stated 

— “ Thence proceeds a two~fold creation" The forms of these 
creations are stated — “ The set of eleven and the five primdry 
elements *’ — only these two creations proceed from the principle 
of Egoism. The '•eva' excludes all other possible suppo- 
sitions. . 

Objection .'—We grant all this : But the 
principle of Egoism being of one uniform 
nature, how can two different kinds of 
creation— inanimate (the elements) and en- 
lightening (the senses) — proceed therefrom? 

KArikA XXV. 

The set of eleven proceeds from the modified principle • 
of Egoism, and partakes of the attri- 
ence fiute of Goodncss. The primary ele- 

i^Attributegf **^**^* mcnts are due to the Attribute of Dark- 
ness ; from Foulness proceed both. 

(161) . The eleven senses, ifeing liglit and enlightening, 
are said to partsike of Goodness, and as snch proceed from 
modified Egoism. From Egoism as affected, on the other hand, 

9 


Ohjeetion : — How 
can two diverse 
kinds of creation 
proceed from a uni* 
form Bgoiam? 

• 

We reply — 



[ 152 — 153 ] 


66 


[k. XXVI.] 


lyr Darkness, proceed the set of the primary elements. How so ? 
Becanse these elements partake of the Attribute of Darkness. 
That is to say — Thongh the principle of Egoism is one and 
uniform, yet from the operation or suppression of various 
Attributes, it produces creations of diverse characters. 

(162). This is objected to— When all the necessary effects 
are brought about by the action of the 
OhjrHwn .-—The attributes of Goodness and Darkness only, 
* have done with the purposeless attribute 
of Foulness. 


We reply — 

“AV’oot Foulness /iiweer/ both’’'' — i. e., the set of eleven as 
well as the primary elements. Though 
neecsary^f^^Jr^inK there is nothing to be done exclusively by 
to aoticTn Fouliicss, yet it is a necessary factor, since 

the attributes of Goodness and Darkness 
are both, by their very nature, inert ; and as such could not 
do their own work unless urged to action by the active and 
mobile Rajas. Thus then, tiie efficacy of the attribute of 
FShlness lies in its character of 8 n 2 )plying tlie motive force to 
the inert attributes of Goodness and Darkness. And tlius 
we see that it is not altogether purjiGseless. 


In erder to describe tlie set of eleven — the effects of Good- 
ness — the author first describes the ten external sense-organs. 

KAnmA XXVI. 

The intellectual organs are, the Eye, the Ear, the 
Nose, the Tongue and the Skin ; those 
of action are, sjieech, liand, feet, the 
excretory organs, and the organ of 
generation. 

(153). Se7ise is defined as the immediate effect of the 
principle of Egoism, as affected by the 
ScTisc Arjined. attribute of Goodness. These are two-fold 

intellectual, and those of action. Both these are called 


The ten External 
Oissns. 



[K. XXVU.J 


{ 154 — 155 ^] 


•Indrhjas (senses) because they are characteristics of the Spirit 
ilhdrob). The senses are named : “ The eye, 

FuMtiona. * 

perceiving colour, the ear for perceiving 
sound, the nose for perceiving smell, the tongue for perceiving 
taste, and the skin for experiencing touch. These are tlie 
intellectual sensc-orgstus. The action of the organs of speech 
and the rest will be spoken of later on (Kilrikii, XXVll.) 


The eleventh scnsc-oi’gans is next described — 

KAkticA XXVII. 

Of these (sense-organs) Mind Qlanas) partsikes of the 
nature of both (intellectual as well as 
— of action): it is the reflecting 
(or thinking) principle, and is called 
a sense-organ since it has cognate properties. Its 
multifariousness, as well as its external forms, are due 
to the various specific modifications of the Attributes. 

(164). » Partakes^ — Among the eleven organs, Mind 

2 )artakcs of the nature of both — it is 
of intellectual di-gau of sensation, as well 

as one of action, since the eye and speecli, 
&c.', operate on their respective objects only when influenced by 
the principle of Manas, 

(155). The author next gives the specific definition of 
Mams — “ It is the reflecting principle ” — - 

Mind defined. That is to say, Mind'xs defined hy reflection 

The reflecting cha- (or thought). It is the principle which . 

***' supplies forms and quali/ications to the 
, abstract cognition of a certain object, which 

jjivariably precedes the concrete and well-defined knowledge 
thereof. As is laid down by an ancient writer — “ At first, 
one observes a certain object without qualifications, and latter- 
ly iutelligeut jieople think of the object as belonging to a certain 



[ 156 — 158 ] 


68 


[k. xxvn.] 


class and having certain properties.” It is a well-known fact* 
that on first seeing an object, the first cognition that one has 
of it, resembles to a great degree the cognition of a child — 
indefinite and unqualified. Soon after this one learns to con- 
nect the object so observed, with its genus, property, &c. 
This latter cognition is said tb be perception', which is a func- 
- tion characteristic of Manas (Mind), and as such serves to 
distinguish it from similar and dissimilar objects, and thus 
serves as its definition. 

(156) . Objection : — Granted all this: But we have seen that 

Egosim and Bnddhi, having distixct fnnc- 
make Mind a sense wons of their own are not classed among 
when it has distinct sensC'Organs ; in the same manner, we shall 

» function of its own? . ” 

not class Manas among thpm either. 

a The author replies — ‘‘ It is a sense-or^gan ^^ — Why ? “ 

cause of its having cognate properties'^ Thia 
property mainly is tlie fact of its being 
the immediate effect of Egoism as affected by 
Goodness, and not that of being a charac- 
teristic of the Spirit ; for this latter pro-* 
perty belongs to Egoism also ; and as such 
this lattpT would also have to be classed 
among sense-organs. Thus then “being the characteristic of 
the Spirit is only an explanation of the derivation of the term 
Jndriya ; it cannot be said to form its denotation, 

(157) . It is asked — Whence such multifarious effects 

from the single principle of Egoism as 

vvhsnce the multi, affected by Goodness ? We reply— “/< ia 
fanoxts effects from ' f “ 

jggoism. due to the apecijic modijicattona of the 

Attributes " — The difference in the effects is 
due to the diversity of auxiliaries in the form of the opera- 
tive principles of sonnd, &c. ' 

(168). Destiny {adriskta') is also a modification of the 
Attributes. We have the qualifying term “External” as 
presenting a comprehensible example, the sense of the sen- 


Beply — It is a sense 
ina.^mucli as it is 
an immediate effect 
of the principle of 
as aifected 
by Goodness — which 
is the definition of a 
$ense. 



[ 169 } 


[k. xxvni — xxix.J 


tence being— As the external forms are the effecls of the 
modifications of the Attribntes, so are also the iutemal and 
imperceptible ones. 

(169). Having thns described the forms of tlie eleven 
sense-organs, the particular fnnctious of J^he first ten are next 
stated. — 


KArikA XXVIII. 

The function of the five senses, in respect to colour, 
* &c., is mere observation or feeling ; 

The function* of speech, handling, walking, excretion 
the exteiJiai organs.^ gratification are (the' functions of) 
the other five. 

By ^'■observation" here is meant the primary al)- 
stract perception ( Nirvikalpa ) through 

function of the dve the intellectnal senses. opeeck 
intellectual senses. ^ of (|ie 

waAdnp, ca^oniikms Organs of action. The vocal organ is 
pertain to the senses located in the throat, the palate, &c., whose 

of action. . , , rni r . • n . 

function 18 speeffh. Ihe functions of the 
cognitive (intellectual organs) are clear eiiongh.* * 


The functions of the three internal organs are next .stated. 
KAeikA XXIX. 

Of the three (the internal organs) the functions are 
Fopetion of the constituted by their respective chara- 
internai organs. etcristics ; thesc are peculiar to each. 


That is to say they are tlcnotod b^i^thoir very names or by their defini- 
tions c. g, the ear is definetl as the sense for perceiving' (or comprehending) 
sound— and thus the function of the ear is perception of sound, ami so with 
the others. 




70 


[160—101] 


[k.*xxx.] 


The function common to the organs consists in the five 
vital airs— PrA,na and the rest. 


(160) . “ 7y/e functions of the three are constituted by their 

' respective characteristics.” That is to say» 

the property which serves as the distia- 
Ahankfti-a aiwi ihucr- miishiiiff feature of eacli of the internal 
organs, also denotes their respective fnnc- 
tions ; thus, determination of Btuldhi^ self-consciousness 
of A/umkdm and retiectioii of Manas. 

«* 

(161) . The double cliaracter of the functions based on the 
fact of their being specific or common is next stated — ‘‘ These 
are peeuliar^^ “ The fim vital airs^ constitute the common 
fanciion^^ The fuiictiou of the three internal organs is the 

substance (of life, and lieuce) of the five 

the ooininoTi fuiic- Vital airs ; Since the latter exist when the 

tion of the three in- former do and cease to exist vvlicu these 
lernal orgjins, 

are absent. Of those the air called Prana 
(Breath or Life) resides in the heart, the navel and the toes; 
that called Apana resides at the hack, &c., Sanidna in the heart, 
the navel and the joints; Uddnam the throat, heart, &c.; 
and lastly, Vydna residei^ iii tlie skin. These are the five 
airs. • 


The author now states tlie order of tlie functions of tliese 
fourfold organs (tlie external organs and the tlirec internal 
organs). 


KArikA XXX. 


With regard to visible objects, the functions of the 


The instantaneous 
and the ^nulual 
chiu’actcr of these 
functions, 


foTir are said to be instaiitaueous, ai4 

* • 

•well as gradual ; "with regard to iti- 
visible objects, tbc functions of the three 



[102-^165] 


71 


[k. XXX.] 


(intenial organs) are preceded by that (/. e. the cognition 
of some visible object.) 

(162) . “ Instantamous” — regard to visible objects” 

, , ^ e. g., when one sees in the dark by meung 

. Instantaneous witli „ „ , „ , . . n . 

reganl to visible ob- .of a flash of liglitiuug, a tiger mcing him, 
his observation, reflection and determination 
are instantaneons and accordingly ho runs away from tlie place 
at once. 

(163) . Gradiml” e. g., in dim light, a person has 

„ , , at first only a faint cognition of a certain 

panl to visible ob- object; then he looks at it more steadily 
and ascertains that it is a thief with 
his bow and arrow levelled at him ; then tlie conscious- 
ness follows “tlie thief is advancing against me”; and he 
finally decides to run away from the place. 

(164) . With regard to invisible objects, on the other Jiand, 
the internal organs operate without the 
aid of the external organs — “ The function 
of the three is preceded bg thatfi. e., the in- 
stantaneons us well as the gradual func- 
tions of the tiijee internal organs are 
preceded by some percejition of a visible 
object ; since Inference, Testimony and the 
other methods of proof operate only when 
they have for their back ground some sort 


With rofXflnl to in- 
visible objo<!tM, the 
ojieration of the in- 
ternal organs inde- 
pendent, of the ex- 
ternal organs. 


The functions of 
internal organs pre- 
<rc<let< by those of the 
cxtern.al ones. 


of external perception. 

(165). Objection: Granted all tliis: Bnt the fnnetions 
Pune ^il-bcr of the four or of tlie three (organs) 


Oh}efftlon\ 
tipns ipermancnt -or 
ol herwisc I 


cannot depend on tlicmsclves alone ; for in 
that case (these organs) must be either 
permanent or transient ; if permanent^ then their fnneions also 
would be permanent ; if transient, then, the various fnnetions 
would combine most absurdly, there being no restrictive 
agency. 



[166—167] 


72 


[g. xxxt] 


KArikI XXXI. 

We reply -They* (the organs) operate towards 
the performation of their respective 
Reply— Fnnctiotw functions, due to mutual impulse. The 

' of the (Jrgans due to • • • 

tnutnaiirapnise. Soni purpose of the Spirit supplies the 

proposes the incen- v • 

tive. motive; by nothing ( else) is an organ 

caused to act. 

The subject of the first sentence is “ organs.” 

(166) . A number of persons wielding different weapons, 
unite for suppressing a common enemy, the one holding a 
lance uses that alone, and so on, each using his own particular 
weapon. In the same manner one organ operates towards 
the fulfilment of another’s purpose, which tends to help its 
own. And since this movement towards action is the cause 
(and hence the regulating motive power) of the action of the 
organs, there cannot arise any absurd collision of the func- 
tions. 

(167) . Another objection — ^The lancers, &c., being sentient 

beings, can comprehend each other’s 
can ^he°'n'ou-hiteUu Kiotives and Can act towards the fulfilment 
gent organs under- thereof. The organs on the contrary, are 
iwtWerT**** * ‘’■ll in-sentient, and as such can never act in 

the same way as the lancers, &c., do (and 
hence your analogy does not apply to the case in question). 
Consequently the in-sentient organs must have an animate and 
intelligent supervisor over them, who is to understand their 
end and urge them to action accordingly. 

We reply : — “ TAe Spirit’s purpose is the motive, by nothing 
(else) can the organs be brought to act.” 
Reply— SouVs pur- gince the purpose of the Spirit is to ’firge 
Action. the organs to action, what iq, the need 

of postulating a supervisor ab extra! This 
point will be further elucidated in KS.rikS. LVII. 

• Davies restricts this to the internal organs ; but there is no reason why ^ 
the Kdrikd should not apply to organs in general— *as the Kaumudi takes it« 




73 


[I68r-170] 


[k. Jtxxn.] 


(168). It haa been declared that “ by nothing la an organ 
brought to act'' The author next statea the division of these 
organs , 


Organs are of thirteen kinds ; they have variously 
the functions of sei^ng, retaining and 
ed— thei^fuuoMons manifesting. The objects of these are 
tenfold, that which is to be seized, 
retained or manifested. 


(169i. The tliirtecn organs consist of tlie eleven sense- 
organs, Ahankara and Buddhi. An organ 
is a particular kind of agent, and no agency 
is possible without a function ; hence the 
author next states the various functions. 

They have the functions^ The senses 

of action have tlie function of seizing ; that 
is to say, they extend their action to their 
respective objects. Bmidhi^ AhankAt'a and 
Manas retain impressions by their respective 
functions — the life-breath, &c. (mentioned 
before) ; and lastly, the intellectual (per- 
ceptive) organs rmnifest their respective objects. 

(170). Since every action must have an object, the objects 
, of the above-mentioned functions are next 

The objects of stated — That which is to he seized^'* 
foi^ objects to be acted upon by the thir- 

teen organs are those that are to be seized, 
retained and manifested. 13y seizure here is meant pervasion 
(or extension). The five senses of action extend over speech 
and the rest ; and each of these being both human and super- 
huifian these objects become tenfold. Similarly the object to 
be retained by the three internal organs is the body, which is 
fivefold being an aggregate of the five great elements, of 
sound, touch, colour, taste and odour. Each of these five 
being both human and superhuman, these objects also become 
10 


The thirteen or- 
gana — the ten exter- 
nal organs, Maiuts^ 
Ah-aiikkrei and Bud*% 
dlii* 

Seizing — 'the func- 
tion of the senses of 
action. 

Retention — the 
function of BvMhi^ 
Aha7hhdra and Ma- 
nas» 

Mtmifcstnthm — of 
the intellectual or- 
gans. . 



[171—174] 


74 


[k. xxxm.] 


tenfold. Similarly the objects of the five intellectnal senses 
are five — sonnd, tonch, colour, taste and odonr ; and each of 
these being both human and superhnman, the objects also 
become tenfold. 


(171). The sub-divisions of tlie thirteen organs are next 
stated 


KArikA XXXIII. 


Internal organs are three ; and the external ten. 


The organs niim- 
beretl and the diffor- 
cnee between the 
external and inter- 
nal in point of time 
noted. 


making objects known to the former 
three. The external organs,^ act at 
time present ; and the internal at the 
three divisions of time. 


(172) . The internal organa are three ; Manas, AhanMra 
and Budelhi, called internal because located inside the body. 

(173) . The external organs are ten : the ten sense-organs. 
These latter exhibit objects to the throe internal organs, i, e., 
they supply the means for reflection, consciousness and 
determination of objects — the intellectual senses functioning 
by means of observation, and the senses of action by means of 
their respective functions. 

(174) . The author next states a further point of difference 

* between organs internal and external — 

The external The external organs act at time 'presertt^^ 

present ; the inter- By “ present IS meant here the time 

nai with reference closely -preceding aiid following the im- 
to all three divisions t . ^ 1 i 1 

of time. mediate present ; thus then, speech* also 

belongs to the present. IV^e internal or^^ 
gans at the three divisions of e. the idea that there 
has been rain,” since the river has risen — (for the past) ; 
“ there is fire in the mountain, since there is smoke” — (foil*the 

y—— — — — — . 

* The special qualification is necessary for the case of speech, because no 
two letters can be pronounced at the same moment, and, as such, no word 
could ^ uttered at the time present if by this word were meant the present 
moment only. This absurdity, however, is avoided by counting a few 
moments before and after the present moment as Included in it. 


75 


[176^178] 


[k. XXXIV.] 


present) ; and lastly, “ we shall have rain, since we see ants 
carrying their eggs” — (for the fiitnre). 

(175). -Time, according to the Vaisoshikas, being one, 
TiTn(v-not a distinct cannot allow such divisions as past, present 
and fatnre. Hence we most have for the 
varioTis units, the varions conditions or 
which we give the uAmes, past, present 
the Sankhyas do not admit of a distinct 


principle! accortU ng 
to the 8iinkhyas. 

specifications to 
and future. So 


The in tolled u.al 
senses touch ing spo-, 
oifio as well as un- 
specific objects; 
speech touching 
sou ml ; the rest i’<> 
garding the five ob- 
jects of sense. 


principle in the shape of Time. 

(176) . The author next considers the objects of the 
externaLsenses operating at time present — 

KAiuKi XXXIV. 

Of these, the five intellectual senses 
(those of sensation) concern objects 
specific as well as non-specific (collec- 
tive); speech concerns sound ; the 
rest i*egard the five objects (of sense.) 

(177) . Of tho ten external senses, the five intellectual 

ones concern specific as well as non-specific objects :~A)y 
specific here is meant gross — and such objects are sound and 
tlie rest (the Tanmdtrasf manifesting themselves as Barth, 
&c., — (the elements) having tho properties of calmness, turbu- 
lence and dal ness. T\\q non-specijlc are the primary 

elements. The particle MAtra^ in the word Tanm&tra^ serves 
to distinguish these from the gross objects. The senses of 
Yogis concern sound, &c., in their subtle as well as gross 
states, whereas the senses of ordinary men relate to sound, 
&c., in their gross forms only. 

(178) . Similarly of the senses of action (the Motor 
Senses). Speech concerns sound, in its gross form, because 
speech is the cause of sound. Speech, however, can not be the 
cause of tfte primary element of sound, which is the direct 
Qffect of Self-consciousness {Akyinkara) ; and as such has the 
same cause as speech itself (which also being one of senses, 
proceeds directly from the principle of Self-consciousness. 



[179] 


76 


[k. xxxv—xxxvi.] 


“ The rest, ” i. e., the four other sensee of action — ^the 
excretory organs, &c., ^'•concern five objects,” because the 
different objects, e. g. jar &c., which are the objects of these 
senses, are all made up of the five primary elements of sound, 
colour, &c. 

Among the thirteen organs, some are said to be superior to 
others, reasons for which are given : 

KAbikA XXXV. 

Since Buddhi with the other internal organs adverts 
to (comprehends) all objects (of sense). 

The superiority of thesc three are said to be the warders 

Intern il over ester- .... 

»ai organs. (principal ones), and the others the 

£• 

gates (secondary). 

(179). "Warders, i. e., chief ones. 

Gates i, e,, such as are the external organs. 

Since J3uddhi, with AJ>,ankara and Manas, apprehends (i. e,, 

», _ determines) all objects exhibited by the 

ac^nted external organs, these latter are said to be 

gates (secoudaiy organs), and Buddhi, with 
the other internal organs, jjie warders (chiefs). 

Buddhi is the chief, not only in comparison with the 
external organs, but also with regard to the other externabor- 
gans, Manas and AhankAra. To this effect it is said: — 

KAkikA XXXVI. 

These (the external organs together ivith Manas 
and Ahankdrd), characteristically 
of'^Buddhi” overau differing from one another and Ixjing 
others accounted different modifications of Attributes 

resemble a lamp in action ; (and as 
such) having first enlightened the Spirit’s purpose, 
present it in its entirety to Buddhi. 



[180—181] 


77 


[k. XXXVII.] 


( 180 ) . As the village officer collects the rent from the 
different heads of families and delivers the collection to the 
treasurer, who again, in his turn, carries it to the head-officer, 
who finally makes it over to the king : so^ in the same 
manner, the external organs, having operated on (observed) • 
an object, present the observation to Manas, which reflects on 
it (and thereby imparts thereto its qualifications) presenting 
these qualified observations in turn to Ahankdra, which takes 
specific cognizance of them, and finally delivers such personal 
cognition to the head-officer, Buddhi. Hence it is said: 
“ These having enlightened the Spirits purpose present it to 
Buddhi?* 

( 181 ) . The external organs together with Manas and 

In spite of diverse AJiankdra, are various affections of Attri- 

combination of the i. e., modifications of Goodness,- 

internal orgaws co- Foulness and Diilnoss, wJiicli tliongh 
Essentially opposed to one another, are ydt 
» lamp. brought to co-operate for the supreme 

purpose of the Spirit ; just as the wick, oil and fire, though 
variously opposed to the action of one another, yet join, nnd.er 
the form of a lamp, in removing darkness, and thus illumine 
(manifest) the different colours. The same is the case with 

the Attributes ; such is the connectjpii. 

• 1 

An objection is raised. . Why should it be said that the 

other organs present their impressions to 

no?'’m^fce"^rddiii Buddhi? — Why should not we make it 

subordinate to the qnite the other way : Bicddhi subordinate 
others 1 ? ai i ' ■> 

to Ahankara ? 

We reply : — 

KiRlKA XXXVII. 


R %P 1 y : The 
superi()rity of Bnciclhi 
accounted fr?r, lie- 
canae it directly ful- 
As the sours pur- 
pose, and bridges 
the gap between 
Spirit and Matter, 


Since it is Buddhi that accomplishes 
the Spirit’s enjoyment, and again 
it is Buddl^i that exposes the subtle 
difference between Nature and 
Spirit, 



[182—183] 


78 


[k. X'XSVIt] 


(18S). Since the purpose of the Spirit is the only in- 
centive to the action of the organs, that organ is supreme 
over others which accomplishes that purpose directly ; and 
since it is Buddhi alone that does this, it is supreme. Just 
as the chief minister, being the direct agent of the king, is 
supreme over other officials.* Buddhi assumes the form of 
' the Spirit tlirongh frs proximity to it, and as such leads to the 
accomplishment of its purpose. Sensation consisting either 
, of pleasure or pain, resides in Buddhi^ which is (reflected) in 
the Spirit and thus leads to its enjoyment. As the 
observation, reflection and consciousness of objects are 
transferred to Buddhi through their various modflications ; 
in the same manner, the functions of the senses also coalesce 
with the functional determination of Buddhi^ as the forces of 
the subordinate officials do with that of the master. 


(183). The objector asks: If Buddhi only servos to 


Objection : — BikI- 
Ulii s u p p 1 y i n K 
tlie soul with plea- 
fiihc, no Mukti, is 
po8sU)le, 

Reply : — It latterly 
shows to the soul 
its distinction £i’om 
MattQf. 


accomplish the Spirit’s enjoyment, then no 
emancipation is possible.* We reply : — 
afterwards exposes thoi difference 
between Spirit and NatiireB — By ex- 
position here is meant ‘bringing about’; 
the construction of Antaravi Visinashti^ 
being ♦similar to that of Odanapakam 


pac1uiU,\ 


The objector retorts : the difTerence between Spirit and 

The differonco koing thus, accortliiig to your own 

beiiif? caused, will saying, a caused one, must have an end 
rmL^patiSn "caw in time ; and thns (the Spirit could never 
’"'‘•-ii it. attain to eternal Beatitude). 


• For Buddhi woiilil coptinuo help the Spirit to its enjoyment of 
pleasure, and hence this latter could never attain to final bsatitude which 
consists in the total extinction of both pleasure and pain. ^ 

t yishiasliti itself luis been explained as — “ expresses the dilferenco,” then 
the mention of would seem supcrtl nous. But it is not so; it helps ^ 

to intensify^the meaning of the sentence. 



[k. XXX vra.] 


[184—186] 79 

We reply ; — ^The difference lias been everlasting ; and tbe 
function of Buddhi lies only in exhibiting 
nt tbe difference to the frill view of the Spirit*^ 
Buddhi only serving who then recognises the foot that he him- 
souvj^Wew! ^ something distinct from the con- 

stitutionally mobile and modifiable Nature. 
(The distinction is not cauml by Buddhi ; It is as eternal as 
the Spirit and Nature tlieinselves). By this it is also implied 
that emancipation is the sole purpose of the Spirit. The 
distinction of S 2 iirit and Nature, however, is extremely subtle 

and hard to be iierceivcd. 

• . 

The organs having been described, the author next descri- 
bes objects, specific and non-siiecific ; 

• KIrikA XXXVIll, 

The five primary elements are non-specific; from 
these five pi’oceed the five gross ele- 

Tlie division of , , • i i. t 

objfiofcs info siieoifio men ts ; tiiese latter are saia to be 

and non-specific*. . i i ^ 

specific ( because ) they are calm 
(soothing), turbulent (terrific) and deluding. 

(184) . Tlie Tamndtras — souiid and the rest — are subtle ; 
and the character of calmness^ &c., ulo not belong to these. 

-The word Mdtra denotes the capability of these elemente of 
being enjoyed. 

(185) . Having thus stated the non-specific, the specific 

objects are described; these From the five 

Tanmdtras^ of sound, touch, colour, taste and odour proceed 
respectively the five gross Elements — Akasa, Air, Fire, 
Water and Earth. 

(186) . Objection: we grant that these are thus produced ; 

but what al)Out tlieir specific character ? 

Specific because \ye reply : “ These are said to be specific^' 

sooth i terri lie and i i ^ 

deluding. — Why r bccanise'‘ they are calm^ tarbuUint 

and deluding. ” The first ^ has a causal 

'and the second a collective signification. 



.[187—188] 


80 


[K. 


Among the gross elements, ATcftsa, &c., some have the 
attrlbate of Goodness predominating in them ; and these 
‘accordingly are pleasing, enlightening and buoyant ; others 
predominate in Foulness, and are turbulent, painful and fickle ; 
the rest predominating in Darkness are dull, confounded and 
sluggish. These elements,, thus visibly ..discriminated, are 
specific i, e., gross. » The primary elements on the contrary 
cannot be similarly discriminated by ordinary people ; and as 

such they are said to be non-specific, t. e., subtle. 

- 

The sub-divisions of the specific objects are stated : — 

KAiuka XXXIX. 

Subtle (astral) bodies and such as are produced of 
parents, together with the gross 
elements, form the “three sorts of 
boSs product ^of specific objects. Of these the subtle 
gr^rei«mentfc bodies are everlasting, and those pro- 
duced of parents are perishable. 

(187) . “ 'J%e specific objects are of three sorts'^ ; these 
three sorts are mentioned : (1) Subtile bodies (which are not 
visible, but are only postulated in order to explain certain 
phenomena) ; (2) Those jirodnced of parents, comprising the 
sixfojd Sheaths (Kosas). Among these latter, hair, blood and 
flesh are produced from the mother ; and the veins, bones and ' 
marrow from the father ; these six are the six Kos'as. Thus 
then we have seen that the subtile bodies form the first kind 
of specific objects ; bodies produced of parents, the second ; 
and the gross elements the third, — objects like the jar, &c., 
being included in the last. 

(188) . The difference between a snbtile body and a body 

produced of i)arent8 is stated — ‘‘ Subtile 
The snbtile bodies bodies are permanent and tlm^ produced 

aro permanent, those qC parents perishable*^ that is to sav 
produced of parents ' , . . , n -n v 

perishable. ending in (dissolving into) either li<iaifiy 

ash or dirt. 



[ 185 )— lyo] 


81 


[k. XI*] 


The Astral body is described. 
KArikI XL. 


The mergent, subtle (astral) body, — formed prime- 

TheAstmiF.o<iyu uncoiifined, permanent, com- 

nnconfinai pcrma- posed of Buddhi and the rest down to ‘ 

nent, and niigratin", * 

the primary elements, — migrates, is 
without enjoyment, and is invested 
with dispositions. 


Unconfinwl 

Permanent, 


and 


(189)» When the emanations from Nature began, the 
first object to evolve therefrom, for each 
Spirit individually, was the Astral Body. 
This body is unconfined, inasmuch as it can 
enter even a solid piece of stone. It is again “ permanent ; ”* 
since it exists all along, from the first creation to the final 
dissolution. . 


The Astral Body is “ composed of Buddhi and the rest, 
down to the primary elements." That is to say, it is an 
aggregate — of Buddhi, Ahankara, the eleven senses and the • 
five primary elements ; and as such it is specific, being 
endowed with the properties of calmness, restlessness and 
, dhlnesB. » 

* (190). Objection : Let this astral body 

Objection tjii- he the only body the seat of enjoyment for 
nceessariness of pos- tjjg Spirit What is the need of the gross • 
astrid and gross. physical body comprised of the six 
sheaths 1 


^ The word niyata is differently interpreted by Kar&yana Tirtha (in his 
St.n%1iya-Chandrika). Pie takes it in the sense of “ restricted,” /. <?., an 
astral body is festricted to one particular Spirit ; and so there are distinct 
astral bodies to each Spirit. The interpreta'ion of Gandapdda closelj 
resembles that of the Kaaim'udL There 'does not seem to be any special 
ground for preferring either of the two, though I am more inclined to the 
* interpretation of the Kammli> 

11 



[Ki XL.] 


[191-192] 82 


We reply : — “ It migrates,'’’ i, e., the astral body invariably 
deserts the body it has lately occnpied, and 
ph^fcX*^)dy, be* occiipics another. (If it. be asked) 

why does it do so ? (we reply) — (becanse it 
is) “ without enjoyment, ” that is to say, 
becanse the astral body by itself— without- a corresponding 
gross physical body *bf six sheaths to afford the seat of enjoy- 
ments, — would be without any enjoyments, and therefore it 
migrates. 


Objection:— How 
cnn the Astral Body 
migrate, being with- 
out dispositions ? 


(191). Objection Transmigration is due to merit and 
demerit; and these have no connection with 
the Astral Body (referring as*they do 
primarily to Btiddhi, and then by reflec- 
tion, to the Spirit) then how can this 
latter migrate ? 

We reply (becanse) “ it is innested with dispositions'' 
The dispositions are merit and demerit, 
disporiUoM?*^ **** wisdom and ignorance, passion and 
dispassion, power and weakness ; endowed 
with these primarily is the Buddhi, with which latter again 
the Astral Body is connected ; and as such the Astral Body 
becomes mediately connected with the various dispositions, 
just as a piece of cloth is perfumed by contact with champaka 
flowdrs. Thus then, being invested with dispositions, it, 
becomes quite natural that the Astral Body should 
migrate. 


(192). (If it is asked) why should not the Astral Body — 
like Nature— last even after the final 
The Astral Body dissolution ? We reply (becanse it is) 
prsJaj^*^ ** “»?erydw<,”that is to say, becanse it dis- 
solves (into Nature its immediate cause). 
The mergent character of the Astral Body is to be inferred 
from the fact of its being caused, (t. e., being caused, and, as 
such, having a beginning ’in time, it must have an e^d 
also). 



[193] 


83 


[k. XU;} 


Objection ; We grant all tliia. But why not attribnte 


Objections : — Why 
not attribute migra- 
tion to Buddhi, ScG, ! 


migration to Bnddbi, Abankara and the • 
senses ? Have done with the nnwarranted 
postulation of an Astral Body. 


We reply : — 


KIkikI'xLI. . 


As a painting stands not without a ground, nor a 
shadow without a stake, so neither does 

cannot rest without the LifUfU {fiuddhi^ &C,,) Subsist 

substrate. ^ supportless, without a specific (body). 


(193). Buddhi, Ac., are called Lingd, because they are the 
means of cognition (Lingan&t^ Jndpak&t, lingavi).* In 
support of this the author puts forth a syllogism : — between 
the ordinary physical death and re-birth, Bnddhi and the rest 
have some sort of evolved body for their receptacle, becftnso 
they are aggregates of the five primary elements ; like 
their prototypes in the ordinary physical body. 

“ Without specific bodies” i. e., without subtle (astcftl) 
bodies. Testifying to this assertion, we have 
‘I'® Mahlbharata). 

roborateci by the “Then Yama ej^tracted from Satyav&n’s 
^ Mahfibhfirata. body, the thuiab-sized body, which bet had 

entrapped andj thus subjugated.’' Here the meution of the 
extracted body as ‘‘thumb-sized” implies the fact of its 
having been the Astral Body, since it is impossible that the^ 
Spirit could have been extracted. By Purusha in the above 
extract, is meant the Astral Body,— explaining the word 
derivatively as — that which sleeps (Jies—sHe) in the body 
{puri). 


Having thus proved the existence of the Astral Body, lihe* 
fuithor states the reason and method of its migration: — 

♦ Of. The whei« a similar 

* explanation of the word is given. 



[194—196] 


84 


[k. XLii— xira.] 


KAbikA XLII. 

Formed for the sake of the Spirit’s purpose the 
Astral Body plays its pafrts like a 

Beagons and man- j x. ^ a 

nor of the migration dramatic actor, on account of the 
* of- the Astral Body, 

connecticfli of means aijd consen[uences, 
and hy union with the predominant power of Nature. 

(194). Formed for the Spirit’s purpose the Astral Body 
plays like a dramatic actor by conuection with the means — 
merit, &c., and consequences, the occupation of different kinds 
of gross bodies, the effects of merit, &c. That is to say, as a 
dramatic actor, occpuying different stages, plays severally the 
parts of Parasuriima, Yudhishthira, VatsarAja so does the 
astral bddy, occHp}'iug various gross bodies, play the part of 
man, brnte or plant. 

(196). (If it is asked) Whence this capability of the 
Astral Body ? We reply, “ by unimi with the 

The capacity of predomimnt power of Nature” As is 

' the Astral Bo.iy is declared by the Puranas : “ The various 
due to the power or, , , , , 

Nature. strange developments are due to liature s 

omnipotence.” 

It has just been said, “ by connection with means and conse- 
quences ; ” the author therefore next describes these means and 
consequences : 

KArirA XLllI. 

The essential dispositions arc innate ; the incidental 
ones, such as merit, &c., are seen 
' The means and con- (considered) to be appurtenant to the 
&c. organs ; the uterine germ, &c., belong 

to the effect.* 

* It may be points out. that Dayies hag quite misunderstood this Kdrikd. 
Iti tiie first place, ho renders S^m^n^dliikdh by transcendental”, the very 
revinrse of what it does mean. Secondly he renders Karandarayiruth by 
“ including cause”, though in reality the compound means “ located in organs” — 
as explained by the Katmudi as well as the Chandrihd, 



[196-r-199j 


85 


[K. XMVi] 


1. Incidental difl- 
positions. 


(196). Incidental = consequent ; i. e., 
brought about after the man’s birth, by 
propitiating the gods, &e. 


“ Essential dispositions are innate'’’ e. g., it is declared that 
at the beginning of the creation the revered 
natl’ ®“®“**“* ‘ primeval sage’ Kapila ^emerged into exist- 

ence, fully equipped with merit, wisdom, 
dispassion and power. Incidental dispositions, on the other 
hand, are not innate, that is to say, they are brought about by 
personal effort ; such merit, &c., are those belonging to 
V&lmiki^and other Great Bishis. 


The opposites of 
Dharma, &c., simi- 
larly explained. 


The same is to be understood with regard 
to demerit, ignorance, passion and weak- 
ness. 


(197). The agrregate formed of the uterine germ, fleshy 
blood, Ac., of the child in the mother’s 
Flesh, bi(^, &c., womb, is related to the gross physical 
body. body ; that is to say, they are particular 

states of the latter ; as are also the child- 
hood, youth, &c., of the born man. 


(198). The means and the consequences have , been 
explained ; now the respective consequences of the various 
me&ns are described. 

KakikA XLIV. 

By virtue (is obtained) ascent to higher planes ; by 
vice, descent to the lower ; from wis- , 
the^v#S mZs.”* (results) beatitude ; and bondage 

from the reverse. 

(199). ^'•J3y tirtm, fc,," i.e., to the 
various starry spheres (the Brsihma, the 
Prajjipatya and so forth.) 


* Virtue leads to 
higher planea. 



[ 200 ] 


86 [k. zliv.] 


Vice to lower. 


" By vice, i. e., to the lower planes 
known as svtala, &e. 


“ From wisdom^ beatitude'* Nature ministers ‘to the ex- 
perience of the Spirit only so long as 
ab^t^b^tnde."**^ discriminative wisdom is not attained ; 

\^hen, however, this is' attained. Nature 
finds its work in connection with that particular Spirit 
fulfilled, and accordingly retires from him. As is declared, 

“ The workings of Nature continue only till the attainment ©■f 
discriminative knowledge.” “ From, the reverse., j'c.” i. e.^ 
from false knowledge, results bondage. 

(200). This bondage is also of three kinds : Natural, 
Incidental and Personal. The natural 
of ttie*aiwe ^pee- that of those Materialists who 

tiveiy, contiiuiictory contemplate on Nature as the Spirit ; with 

SSofSdag^l^”* reference to such men, it is laid down in 
the Puranas : “ The contemplators of the 

nnmanifested (Nature) continue (in the chain of metempsy- 
chosis) till a hundred thousand years” [at the end of 
which they attain to true wisdom]. The incidental bondage 
is of those who contemplate on the various products of Nature 
as Spirit, — the elements, the senses, AJiankdra and Buddhi. 
With regard to these it is laid down : “ Tlic contemplators of 
the senses continue till ten Manvantaras ; those of the ele- • 
ments, till a hundred Manvantaras ; those of Ahank&ra, till a 
thousand ; and lastly, those of the Buddhi having done away 
with all feverish excitement, continue till ten thousand 
Manvantaras. Those labouring under the incidental bondage 
are (conventionally called) Videhas” 

The personal bondage is due to Ishtdpiirta (actions done 
with selfish motives, such as the digging of tanks, &c., done 
with the sole motive of personal gains hereafter). Those 
performing such actions, having their minds influenced by 
desire, are ignorant of the true' nature of the Spirit, and 
such undergo bondage. 



[ 201 —^ 3 ] 


87 


[k. xlv.J 


KAuiKi XLV. 


From dispassion results absorption* vcAo .Prakriti ; 

from 4)assionate attachment, transmi- 
TaSourSwf gration; from power, non-impedi- 
•ment (of d'esires;)^ and from the 
reverse, the contrary. 

(201). From dispassion resitUs absorption into PrakritiF 

I. Absorption into who are free from passion, but are 

Prakriti from dispas- ignorant of the tme natnre of spirit, are 
• absorbed into Nature. By Prakriti here are 

meant Prakriti, Buddki^ Ahankara^ the Elements, and the 
senses. Thosfe who meditate upon these as Spirit are absorbed 
ftito these (i. d. those mistaking the senses for the Spirit 
become absorbed in the senses, and so on), that is to say, 
they rest there till, in the coarse of time, they are born again. 


(202). From passionate attachment residts migration^ 


II. Transmigra- 
tion from ptissionate 
attachment. 


The epithet “passionate” irapUes the pain- 
ful character of raeterapsycJiosis ; becafiso 
(as has been previonsly described) passion 


is the source of pain. 


(208). From 'power, rion-imifedUnentr i- e., the non- 
^ obstruction of desires. “A powerful -man 

ent’frmn power?^'" (Iswara) is one who can do whatever he 
wishes.” 


* Davies takes the Hindu commentators to task, here, and remarks : 
(the Sdnkbja) does not recognise any absorption of the subtle body into 

Nature, until the sonl is entirely free Hence the meaning is that by 

the destruction of passion, the influence of the material world is destroyed, 
and the soul is independent, though not yet finally liberated/’ All this is 
qnitc^tme ; but I don’t see how this affects the position of the Hindu 
commentators, who, at least Vdchaspati Misra among them, do not assert 
the final absorption of the bodies into Nature ; all that they mean is that by 
dispassion, the sonl — or more properly, ^its seat, the astral body — is absorbed 
izfto Natnre and rests there till it is born again. It may be remarked that 
this resting is what, in theosopbic parlance, is called the peaceful rest 
enjoyed by the Individuality in Devachan,” 



88 


[k.'XLVI.] 


[204—205] 


IV. Obstruction of 
desires from weak- 
ness. 


“ Ftom the reverse'' i. e. form weakaess— 
contrary" — i. e., the frequent obstruc- 
tion of desires. 


With a view to describe collectively a^ well as individually, 
the eight properties .of Buddhi — virtue, vice' &c., in order to 
show which of these are to be practised, and which relinquish- 
ed, by those desiring emancipation — the author first describes 
them collectively 

KAmkA XLVI. 

This is an intellectual creation, distinguished by 
Error, Disablity, Contentment and Per- 
fection. By the hostile influence of 
the inequalities of attributes, the 
different forms of this creation become fifty. 

(304). That by which anything is known, i. e., 

Buddhi, Error," i. e., ignorance, is a pro- 

K. Disability. pcvty of Buddhi ; so is also '•'disablity” which 

IV results from the incapacity of the sense- 

organs. Contentment and Perfection also 
are properties of Buddhi a,s will be described later on. 

Of these, the three former, — error, disability and content- r 
ment — include Virtue and the other six ,in- 
edTn'*thotbove’'fiur’ tellectual properties ; leaving aside Wis- 
dom which is included in Perfection. 

(206). These properties are next considered individually. 

“ T/ie forms of these are fifty P If it is 
asked: Whence these fifty forms? Wo 
reply "•from the hostile influence of the ' 
inequalities of the attributes^ The inequality may consist 
either in the individual strength of the one in comparison 
with the other two, or of two eonjointly with that of the third. 
This inquality is assumed to be more or less in accordance 
with the requirements of particular cases ; and it leads to the ’ 



89 


[206r~2083 


[k. XLVU.— XLVlHi J 


snppression of Attributes by one another — thus giving rise to 
the fifty forms of intellectual creation. 

The fifty forms are next enumerated : 

KAbika XLVII. 

* * 

There are five forms of Error.; twenty-eight of 

5 forms of Error. Disability, arising from the imperfec- 
28 of Disability. / ’ ® ^ • 

9 of Contentment, tion of the Organs ; Contentment has 

sf forms ; and Perfection eight. 

(20ft). The forms* of Error are ignorance^ egotisniy 
poiaion^ hatred and attachment to the body: respectively 
called, obscurity (JFamas), delusion (Idoha). extreme delusion 
{Mahamoha), gloom (Tawitara), and utter darkness (Andkof 
tandsra'). Egotism, &c., partake of the nature of Error; 
though, as a matter of fact, they are its products. A certain 
object being erroneously determined by Ignorance, Egotism 
and the rest, partaking of the nature of Ignorance, become 
attached to it. It is for this reason that the revered VArsha- 
gauya (VyAsa?) declares Ignorance to be made up of the “five 
component parts. 


(207). Now the author states the sub-divisions of the five 
forms of error ; — • 

KAkikA XLVIll. 

Of Error there are eight forms, as also of Delusion ; 

extreme Delusion is ten-fold ; Gloom 
is eighteen-fold, and so is also utter 
Darkness. 

(208). “ 0/ Error^ i. e., of Ignorance, 
'■'•there are eight forms*' 

* ♦ Ahhluimha — is a technicality of Yoga Philosophy. It is deftned by 
PatanjiiU (^Yoga S'fitra 11-9) a8 the ‘‘tenacity of life — an attachment to the 
body which relates the rcsiduo of one’s former life.** 

12 


iSixty-two subdivi- 
aiona of Error, 


cfl Ignorance — 

eight format 


[k. XLvni.J 


[209—212] 


Ignorance of the form of Error consists in mistaking non- 

w t,* » TM I spiritual Nature, Bvddhi, Ahmk&ra and 

Bight of Delusion. ,f , , . « « • -x i iu 

the subtle elements, for Spirit ; , and these 

non — spiritual things are eight in number. Error is said 

to be eight-fold. 

(209) . The refers the eight forms to Delusion. The 
gods having attained the eight occult powers, consider them- 
selves to be immortal, and their powers also to be everlasting ; 
this is the error of Egotism, and since this has the eight 
Siddhis for its object, it is said to be eight-fold. 

(210) . Extreme Delusion is ten-foldP By l^treme 

Delusion is meant the attachment to the 
DdiMion/ ®**”“*° objects of sense, sound, odour and the rest 
— ^which are ten-fold, each of the five being 
either divine or otherwise ; and hence having these for its 
object. Extreme Delusion is said to be ten-fold. 

(211) . “ Gloom," i. e.. Hatred, “ is dghteenrfold" The 

objects of sense, sound, &c., are ten by 
OlTOin.*'****' *** themselves ; the eight occult powers how- 

*■ ever are not objects of sense by themselves, 

but only as means to the attainment of the various sensuous 
objects. And the objects of sense, being mutually suppressive, • 
their means — the Powers-^-too are retarded. The Powers, 
together with the objects of sense, make up eighteen, and 
these being the objects of Gloom or Hatred, make it eighteen- 
fold. 

(212) . is Utter Darkness" — [Utter Darkness = 

Attachment to life]. The word “ taihd ” 
DMkn<^.'^ *^**^'^^ eighteen-fold-ness to Utter Darkness. 

The gods having atttiined the eiglit occult 
powers and enjoying their consequences — ^the ten sensuous 
objects — live in continual fear of these being wrested from tliem 
by the Bakshasas ; and this fear constitutes Abkinivesa or 
attachment ; and this latter having fur its object the aforesaid' 
eighteen things — the eight powers and the ten objects — is 
said to be eightocu-fold. 


Eighteen 

Gloom, 


( 212 ). 


Eighteen of Utter 
Darknees. 



[213r-216] 91 [k. XLIX.] 


(218). Thns the five forms of Error, with their snb^ivi* 

aions become sixty-two. 

« 

(214)^ Having thus described the five forms of Error, the 
author next states the twenty eight forms of Disability : 


Twenty-eigh t 
forma of Disability. 


SlArikA 

The injuries of the eleven organs, together with 
those of Buddhi^ are pronounced to be 
Disability; the injuries of Buddhi 
(itself) are seventeen — ^brought about 
by the reversion of contentment and perfection. 

(215). The injuries of the organs are mentioned as causes 

ThoBievon— many injuries of Buddki, and not 

caused by injuries to as, by themselves, independent forms of 
the sense-organs. Disability. These injuries — “Deafness, 

leprosy, blindness, paralysis, paralysis of the hands, lameness, 
dumbness, ajighratd (failure of the sensibility of the olfactory 
nerves), impotency, failure of the action of the bowels, and 
idiocy,” — consequent on the failure of the various seUse- 
organs,are the eleven kinds of intellectual disability, and these 
are mentioned together with those of Bttddhi (itself) in 
accordance with the theory of the don-difference of cause and 
effect. 


(216). Having thns described the disabilities of Buddhit 
arising from those of the sense-organs, the 
by^c” disabilities of Buddhi itself are next stated 

contentment of per- With the injuries of Buddhi’' Ifit be 
asked — how many are these? — we reply. 


fection. 


seventeen are the injuries of Buddhi.” Wherefore? “iy 
revfjjrsion of contentment and perfection^ Contentment being 
nine-fold, ihe disabilities caused by its reversion are nine-fold 
also ; and similarly perfection being eight-fold, the disability 
caused by its reversion is eight-fold, — ^thus making the 
seventeen intellectual disabilities proper. 



[217—220] 92 [k. l.] 

(217). The author next enumeratee the nine forms of 
Contentment : 


KAbucA L. 


Nine forms of Contentnaent are set forth : four in- 
NinefonnaotAo- relating severally to nature, 

quiesoonoe. means, time and luck ; and five ex- 

ternal, relating to abstinence from objects of sense. 


(218) . The five internal forms of Contentment belong to 

those who have ascertained that Spirit is 
foms different form Nature, but still being ill- 

advised, do not make further attempts in 
the direction of meditation, &o., which are the means of 
discriminative wisdom ; and these forms are called internal, 
because they pre-snpposo the difference of Atman and Prakriti. 
It being asked — winch are these? — the reply is '■'•relating 
severally to nature, rnmns, time and luck” i. e., whose names 
are nature &c. 

(219) . The contentment called consists in the 

satisfaction of the disciple on being told 
I. Ambha. discriminative wisdom is only la 

modification of Prakriti and, as such, would come to every 
one in the natural course of events, and there is no need of 
hankering after it by meditation, &c., and this contentment is 
also called Ambha. 


(220). The second form of contentment arises from the 
following instruction : wisdom could not 
' ‘ . be attained in the ordinary course of nature; 

because, if it were so, then everybody would attain to wisdom, 
because the course of nature for the forms of nature affects all 
individuals equally. Such wisdom could only be- attained 
through asceticism ; and so thc/U must follow an ascetic life 
and give up all meditation, &c. The satisfaction arising from 
the above instruction is called Salila. 



];221— 224] 93 [k. l.] 

(221> The third form, called ‘’Time,” or Ogha, is the 
satisfaction arising from thej instrnction 
III. Ogha. asceticism too cannot bring abont 

iilmancipal^on ; for all means await the proper Time for bring- 
ing about their various consequences, and so when the Time 
has arrived, one’s ends will be gained without undergoing the 
troubles of asceticism. 


(S2S). The fourth form called ^^Luck” or Vriahti, is the 
iv VriBha satisfaction arising from the following: 

“ Discriminative wisdom proceeds neither 
from nature, nor from any other means (such as asceticism, 
&c.), nor does it depe'nd solely upon time, but it comes only by 
luck. Thus it was through mere luck that the children of 
Madalasfl, when quite infants, obtained wisdom by their 
mother’s instructions and thereby attained beatitude. 


(223) . The exterijal forms of Contentment are five, arising 

fromtabstinence from sound, odour, &c. — 
foms the five objects of sense. These belong to 

those who are free from all attachnwnt, 
but take the non-spirits — Nature, &c., to be Spirit. These 
forms are called external^ because they pre-suppose tho 
existence of Sinrit, without knowing what it is ; and these 
come after freedom from attachment. The causes of this»non- 
attachment being five, it is five-fold, and consequently so _is 
the contentment resulting therefrom. The objects of sense 
being five, the abstinence from these must also be five-fold. 
Abstinence too is due to tho preception of discrepancies in the 
process of sensuous enjoyment — consisting mainly of earning, 
saving, wasting, enjoying, killing lives and so on. 

(224) . To explain : — ^The means of acquiring wealth, 

* service, &c,, are invarably the sources of 

I. Pftn» servants — as is declared in the 

following Who would ever be attracted towards service, 
considering the pain caused by tho insults to bo snflered. at 
* the hands of the wardens of a vain monarch ? ” — the content- 



94 


£225—229] 


[k. la.] 


ment resniting from abstinence from objects of sense dne 
to the consideration of snch troubles, is called P&ra. 


(226). And then, the wealth being obtained, ' brings with 
it the farther tronble of protecting it from 
up ra. king, thieves, floods and fire — the- 

contentment dne to.,abstience arising from snch considerations 
is the second called Supdra. 

(226) . Thirdly, the wealth having been obtained and 

safely hoarded, there arises the fear of its 
III. MrAp&ra. jjging gpgQt — this Consideration gives rise 
to the third form of abstinence leading to, contentment called 
Pdrapdra. 

(227) . Fourthly, when one becomes acenstomed to 

sensnons objects, his desires increase ; the 
IV. Awuttam&mtha. gf these brings about the 

fourth, called AnuttamdmbAa. 


(228). Lastly, there arises the notion that there can be nb 

V 77 /A A 7,7 enjoyment (either in this world or the 
uttamAnau. ^ther), without the cmel process of kilUng 

animals, and contentment dne to the abstinence arising from 
the perception of the cruelty of the process, is the fifth 
•called Uttamdmb/ta. 

Thus the four external froms of contentment, together with,, 
the five internal ones, make up the nine froms mentioned 
above. 


(229). The author next describes the primary and 
secondary divisions of Power ; — 

KArikX LI. 

The eight Powers (*. e., means of acquiring themX aro 
reasoning, oral instruction, study. 

The eight powers* ^ 

three-fold.suppression of pain, acquis^ 
tion of friends, and purity. The three before mentioned 
(Error, &c.) are checks to these (Powers). 



[230-235] 


96 


[k. u.] 


(1) T&ra. 


(^80). The chief among those enumerated above is the 
three-fold 8upprM»ion of pain — ^three-fold on account of the 
three-foldnesa of the pains to be suppressed. 

The other means mentioned, being means to power only 
through the three-fold suppression of pain, are called seconda^ 
ry. And these five are both causes and effects. Of thesQ 
stttdy is only a cause. The three principal ones (suppression 
of pain) being only effects ; the rest ore both cause and effect. 

(231) . The first, study, named T&ra, consists in compre- 
hending the sense of the psychological 
sciences by listening to the teachings of a 

qualified teacher. 

(232) . The effect of this last, oral instruction, implies the 

comprehension of the meaning of instrnc- 
(8) Sutara. tions, it being a useful habit with writers, 
to imply the effect by the cause ; this constitutes the second 
Siddhi called Sutara. 

(233) . Beasoniny consists in the investigatin of the meaning 

T&ratara scripture by a process of dialetics not 

contrary to the scriptures themselves. TIjjs 
investigation consists in strengthening the portion of the 
scripture by setting aside all doubts and objections with regard 
to it ; this process is also called meditation by writers on the 
Vedas, aud the Power due to this is called Tdrdtdra. , 

(234) . The fourth is the acquisition of friends. Even 
though one has arrived at truth by the 
right process of reasoning yet he has no 

faith in his conclusions until he has talked them over with 
his teacher aud follow-students, Heuce the acquisition of 
a qualified teacher and follow-students is said to be the fourth 
Siddhi called Ramyaka. 

* (23^). By dana here is meant purity (of discriminative wis- 

( 5 ) BadamuAta. -deriving the word from the root 

, Baip* =to purify. As is declared by the 

** Davies remarks that tbe root is “coined for the occasion.*' But 
1 may refer the reader to the SiddltAiUurKa^tiiinudi^ uuder the Sutra 
*VAuyasya S^ny^yadth (VI/4/68). 


(4) Ramyaka 




•[230—238] 96 .[k. tl*] 

revered Pe»tanjali : An unimpeded discriminatve knowledge 
is the means to the suppression of pain/^ (Yoga-Sutra II — 26)- 
By unimpededness in the Sutra is meant purify^ by which 
again is meant the process of placing discriminative wisdom on 
a clear basis, after haying destroyed all doubts and mistaken 
potions mixed with different-kinds of cravings or desires}. .This 
purity is not obtaifiable without the refinement arisin^-tfipiplf^ 
long and uninterrupted course of practice (of the wisdom 
attained). Thus the word dina includes (as a means to power) 
Practice also. This is the fifth, called SadtUMudita. 

(236) . The three primary means to Power are called, Pm- 
moda Mudita and Modamam. And these three *’with the 
last five are the eight (means to) Power. 

(237) . Others explain the distich thus : The perception of 

truth without the instruction of others, 
tiot ofthe about purely by means of instruc- 

tions received in past births is what is 
meant by tika. And that which is obtained by listening to 
the tenets of the Sankhya Philosophy as learnt by others, is 
the second called Sdhda^ because it follows merely from tho 
study of the text. When the truth is learnt lit a teacher’s, in 
the company of follow-students, it is said to be the third, 
known as study ^ because it is brought about by study. The 
foiffth consists in the attainment of wisdom by coming ip 
contact with a friend who has already got it. Fifthly, gene’- 
rosity is said to bo a means to wisdom, because true wisdom 
is imparted by the teacher, duly propitiated with gifts. 

The propriety of either interpretation we leave to the 
learned to judge ; and we desist from pointing out the faults 
of others, because our duty lies only in elucidating the cardi- 
nal doctrines of the Sankhya Philosophy. ^ 

(238) . The Disabilities of i?Mrfrf/^^a^isingfpom the reversion 
of Contentment and Power thus become seventeen in number. 
Of the dilferont poritions o‘f intellectual creation, it is w/^ll- 
knowii that Power is most desired by all. So the author next 
mentions Error, Disability and Contentment as impediments* 



[230-^240] 


97 


[K. LIls] 


to Power : “ The aforesaid three are chechs to Pomr.” The 
aforesaid three refers to Error, Disability and Contentment. 
And these tire curbs to the different means of attaining Power, 
because they retard. their progress; and thus being opposed 
to Power, the latter three are ever undesirable. 


(889). Objection : — Granted all this. 'But it has been laid 
down that the creation is for the Spirit’s purpose. This pur- 
jwse can be fulfilled either by the intellectual creation alone ; 
or by the elemental alone. Why have both ? 

The reply is : — 

KIuika LII. 

Without dispositions there would be no Linga (Ele- 
iffcccssity o£ two. Hient), aiid without the Liiiga there 
fold creation. ’ would be HO development of dieppsi-* 

tions. Wherefore proceeds a two-fold creation, the 
personal (belonging to the body, astral and gross) and 
intellectual. 


(240). Lingci denotes the creation composed of the primary 
elements ; and disposition^ the intellectual. 

The meaning of the Karika is ^liat the elemental creation 
^cannot manifest itself for the fulfilment of tlie purpose of the 
Spirit, without the intellectual creation; nor conversely is’ 
the latter capable of having its complete manifestation with- 
out the elements. Hence the necessity of a two-lbkl creation. 


Again experience, the purpose of the Spirit, is not possible 
in tlie absence of the two bodies and the 

. creatiou! necessity of the 

^ elemental creation. And conversely the 

necessity 8t the experience— the sense-organs— 

intellectual ere a- could never be complete without the three 
internal organs — Manas AhauMra and 
BiiddhL Nor would these latter be what they are, if there 
were no dispositions, virtue, &c. And lastly, discriminative 


Necessity ftf the 
intellectual c r c a - 
tfon. 



[ 241 — 245 ] 


98 


[k, un.] 


wisdom — tiie only means to emancipation, would not be 
possible withont the above two kinds of creation. Whence 
the necessity of the double creation. 

(241) . The possible objection of reciprocal causality is 

explained, away as beii^ similar to that 

prSa5^uty“ei ^ sprout, due to the- fact 

. plained as duo to of the creation having had no beginning 

(being eternal), and the creation 
of bodies and dispositions at the beginning 
of the present cycle is said to be due to the impnlse of 
residual tendencies loft by the bodies and (dispositions related 
to particular Spirits), in the previous cycle. 

(242) . The various forms of the intellectual creation hir- 
ing been mentioned, the author next mentions tliose of the 
elemental creation : 


KAbikA LIU. 


The divine class has eight varieties, the lower 

The force of ele- animals, five ; mankind is single in 
mental creation. class; thus briefly is the world 

of living beings, 

(243). The eight divine varieties are the Brahma, the 
Pajapatya, the Aindra, the Foitra, the 

i eigns aiTinc 

sorts. 


The eight diyinc Gandharva, YAksha, the IlAkshasa and 


the Paisacha. 

(244) . The five varieties of lower animals are quadrupeds 

five of tho lower (other than deer), deer, birds, creeping 
Mimals. things and the immovable (trees, &c.) 

(245) . ManJdvd is single, not counting its sub-divisions — 

Bralimanas &c., as separate, as the bodily 
■ Mankind single, formation is the same in all classes 'of 
men. 



99 


[246-r.248] 


[k. uv— lv,] 


(246). The author next lays down the three-foldness 
of the elemental creation based on the excess or otherwise 
of intelligence in the form of the higher, the middle and 
the lower ; 

KIkikA LIV. 


Among the beings of the highei' plane Goodness 
Theaiiierentdivi. predominates; among those of the 
on’lhfJSi^ lower predominates Dulness ; in thp 
of the Attributes. middle reside those predominating in 

Fofilness — these constituting the whole Universe, from 
BrahmS, to the tuft of grass. 


(247). The Heavenly regions — Bhnvah, Swah, lilahah, 
Jana, Tapas and Satya — predominate in 
Heavenly Qoodness. Those consisting of the lower 
animals and trees, &c., are characterised by 
Daluess. The regions of the earth — consisting of the seven 
Dvipas (or continents) and Oceans — ^predominate in Foulness, 
inasmuch as they abound in pain and are given to actions, 
righteous or otherwise. 

The whole of the Universe is summed up in the pharse 
^‘•from Brahmd to tlie tuft of grassS* 


(248). Having thus described the creation, the author 
next describes its productiveness of pain, that would lead to 
dispassion, one of the means to Emancipation : — 

KAmkA LV. 

There (in the world) does the Sentient Spirit experi- 
Ti» sources of cnce pain, arising from decay and. 

death, due to the non-discrimination 
of the Spirit from the body, .until it is released from its 
^rson (until the dissolution of the astral body) ; where- 
fore pain is natural. 



[k. tvi.] 


[249—261] 100 

Among corporeal beings there are many varieties of experi- 
ence interspersed with pleasure and pain ; 

’ A yet the pain of decay and death is the 

lot of all creatures. common lot of all. Tlie fear of death, — 

“ may I not cease to be ; may I continue to 
be ” &c. — ^l)eing common to - man as well *3 to the smallest 
insect, and the caiise of fear constituting pain, death is a 
source of pain.* 

(249) . Objection: — Pleasure and pain are the properties 
of Buddhi ; and as such how can these be said to belong to 
the Spirit? 

Reply : — (the name) “ Purusha,'' literally meaning “ One 
. who sleeps in the astral body” ; and this 

connected with Buddhi and 
its properties, leads to the idea of the Spirit 
being connected with them. 

(250) . Question ; — How can pain related to the body be 
said to belong to the Spirit ? 

^•i lieply : — Due to the non-d.iscrimination of Spirit from 
the bodyP The Spirit, not alive to its dis- 

Limit of the pain. from the body, mistakes the fluctu- 
ations of the latter for its ,own. The sn in may be 

taken as pointing to the limit of the Spirit’s pain — the mean- 
ing being, “ Until the body has ceased to be, the Spirit suffers * 
pain.” 

(251) . The author next decides the question of the Maker 
of the Universe : 

KarikA LVI. 

This creation from Buddhi down to the specific ele- ^ 
ments, is brought about by the modi- 
theliaiceMftileUni” fications of Prakriti. The "work is 

¥01*80 deoidod. 


done for* the emancipation of eaq]i 


* It may be worth notin" here that Death in itself is not pain, it is only • 
the fear (the fear of the unknown) that makes the thought of death so painful* 



[ 252 ^ 254 ] 


101 


[k. ivi.3 

Spirit, and thus is for another's sake, though appear* 

ing as if it were for the sake of Nature herself. 

• 

(252). The creation is brought about by Nature ; it is 
• neither produced by a God, nor is it an 

TOcrtifieientTjiws . evolution from Brahman ; nor can it be said 
tion set aside. to be Uncaused ; since; in this latter case, 

the Universe would be either an eternal 
entity or eternal non-entity (an absurdity). It cannot be said 
to be evolved from Brahman (the Vedanta view), for there can 
be no (material) modification of puie intelligence. Brahman, as 
postulatSd by Vedanta. Nor, again can creation be said to bo 
brought about by Nature under the guiding hand of a God ; 
for a God is naturally without action and, as such, cannot bo 
the supervisor, just as an inactive carpenter cannot be said to 
manipulate his tools. 

(263). Objection : — Granted that the creation is due to 

.Kature Nature alone. But Nature is eternally 
®no active and, as such, her operations should- 

pation possible. never cease ; and hence there would bo^ no 
emancipation of any Spirit. 

Reply : — “ Tfie creation appearing as if it were for Nature's 
Thooroa- Sake, is really for the sake of an- 

lioii is for the spirit’s others A cook, having finished the cook- 

cml and ceases with . , . „ , , , 

the purification of lug, retires from the work ; similarly , 
*^‘*'’°* Nature beinp: urged to actiou for the eman- 

cipation of the Spirit, brings about this emancipation ; and 
thenceforth cease her operations with regard to the Spirits 
alroatly liberated (and, thus emancipation is not impossible). 

(^54). Objection: — Granted all this. But it is only 

, something sentient that can act towards 

inMnfiont**' Niitiu" thc fulfilment of its owii Or of another’s *■ 

cannot, act towanis pvirposc; auifNature bciiig insentient cannot 
adeflnite end. * , , i 

act in the manner described ; and, as such, 
she reijiiircs a sentient supervisor (over her blind force) ; 



{.255~255a] 


102 


[k. Lm] 


the Spirit residing in the hody cannot be snch a supervisor, 
becanse snch conditioned Spirits, arc ignorant of the true 
.character of Nature ; consequently there must be„some other 
sentient agent, superintending ah extra the operations of 
Nature — and to this we give the name God. 

We reply ; — 

KiuiKl LVII. 


As the insentient milk flows out for the growth 
Instance of an in. the calf, SO docs Nature operate 


sentient object act- 
ing towards a defi- 
nite end. 


towards 

Spirit. 


the emancipation .of the 


(255). It is a fact of observation that insentient objects 
also act towards definite ends, c.^., the action of milk towards 
''the nourishment of the calf. Similarly Natnre, though 
insentient, could act towards the emancipation of the Spirit. 


(255a). It would not be right to urge that the production 
The view of a being due to the superintend- 

Pcrsdiial Univcrs.al ing carc of God, its action cannot afford 
liord overthrown. parallel to the action of insentient 

Nature ; — becanse all actions of an intelligent agent are due 
‘either to selfishness, or bbncvolence, neither of which can be 
said Ito be the cause of the creation of the Universe, which,* 
therefore, cannot be said to be due to the action of an intel- 
ligent agent. For God, being the Lord of the Universe, has 
all that he requires and, as snch, He can have no selfish 
motive ; nor can His action be said to be due solely to pity ; for 
pity consists in a desire for the removal of others’ pains; 
but before creation, Spirits were without bodies, and, as such, 
without pain, for the removal of which God’s compassion 
would be moved. And if the pain subsequent to crea- 
,tion were said to be the cause of creation, then we should 
be in the inextricable nooze* of reciprocality ; the creatiqh 
due to pity, and pity due to the creation. And again if God 
were moved to creation by pity, then ho would create none 



[266—258] 


103 


[k. tvin.] 


but happy mortals. And if the diversity of pleasnres bo • 
attributed to the past deeds of the individual Spirit, then 
what is the necessity of postulating a supervisor ? And if 
yon urge the incapability of mere Karma — an unintelligent 
agent — without a supervisor, towards creation, then we reply, 
that the creation- of bodies, &C .5 being incapable of being - 
produced by Karma, we may very easily Say the same with 
regard to pleasure, &jz., as well (and, pleasure, &c., will have 
to be attributed to God also). 

(256) . The action of the non-intelligent Prakrit! is due 

None ofHhc above ‘o selfishness nor to mere pity; 

objections apply to and thus in this case, none of the above • 
the case of Nature. faults are applicable. The only motive of 

Nature is the purpose of the Spirit. Thus therefore the 
instance cited in the Kdrika is quite appropriate. 

(257) . It has been said — “ as if for its own purpose.” 
The author explains this : — 

KAbikA LVIII. 

As people engage in acts to satisfy desires, so does 
the Unmanifested Principle (Na- 

The Spirit’s end — ^ i ^ 

^ the motive of Na- ture) act for the emancipation of 
the Spirit. 

Desire is satisfied on the attainment of the desired object 
which is . the purpose of the agent ; because an end of action 
is only that which is desired. 

The similarity is pointed out : “ So does tlie Vnmanifested 
Frirtciple act for the Emancipation of Spirit.” 

(258) . * Objection : — We grant that the purpose of tbo 
Spirit is the motive to the ttetion of Nature, but whence 
the cessation of her operations ? 

Wc reply. — 



[259— 260| 


104 


[K. MXr— lx.] 


Kamka LIX. 

As a dancing girl, having exhibited herself to the 

spectators of the stage, ceases to 
The canse of the ^ 

oessation of Nature’s daiicG, SO does jNature cease to operate 

operations. when she has made' hdtself inani- 

( 

fest to the Spirit. 

The word “ stage,” — the place — implies the spectators, — > 
the occupiers of the place. Having manifested herself i. e., 
her different modifications, sound, &c., as different from 
the Spirit. 

(S59). Objection : — We grant the action of Nature for 
the Spirit’s purpose. But she is sure to get some compensa- 
tion for her pains from the Spirit — -just as a servant does 
from his gratified master ; and as such the motive of Nature 
cannot be said to be purely altrnistic. 

We reply : — 

KAiukA lx. 

Generous Nature, endowed with attributes, causes 

Nature expects no ™auifold incaus, without benefit to » 
componsatioii. licrself, the good of the Spirit, Avho is 

devoid of attributes, and as such ungrateful. 

As a qualified servant accomplishes the good of his un- 
qualified master, through purely unselfish motives, without 
any benefit to himself; so does generous Nature, endowed 
with the three Attributes, benefit the Spirit without any ^jood 
in return to herself. Thus the pure unselfishness of Nature’s 
motives is established. 

. (260). Objection : — We grant ail this : But a dancing girl 
having retired from the stage after her exhibition, returns to it 



105 


[k. ixi— till.] 


[261—262] 

again, if so desired by the spectators ; similarly, would Nature 
act even after having manifested herself to Spirit. 

We repl'H : — 

KImkA LXI. 

NotWng is more modest than Nature : such is my 
‘ opinion. Once aware of having been 

Xhc rcflflon why , 

Nnturo does not re- scen, she does not again expose herself 

vert to her actions. . . , 

to the view or the 

By modesty here is meant delicacy (of manners), the 
inability to suffer exposure to the Puruska's view. As a well- 
bred lady unvisible to the Sun, with her eyes cast down, having 
her body uncovered by chance, happening to be seen by a 
stranger, tries to hide herself in such a way as not to be seen 
again ; so Nature — even more modest than such a lady — 
having once been seen by the Purnshn, will is no case show 
herself again. 

(261). Objection : — Let this be so. But Ptirttsha, being 
devoid of Attributes and Modifications, how is his emanc^- 
tion possible ? For emancipation consists in the removaL of 
bondage ; and bondage being only another name for the karmic * 
residua imbued with dispositions and troubles, it is not possible 
to the nnmodifying Purusha. And^s the Purusha is dj^void 
•of action it can have no migration — which latter is only another * 
name for death. Hence it is a meaningless assertion that 
the creation is for the purpose of Purusha. 

The author meets the above objection by accepting it : 
KArikA LXIL 

Verily no Spirit is bound, or is emancipated, or - 
, migrates ; it is Nature alone which * 

lease in reality ap- has many rcccptacles, that is bound, 

ply to Nature. . , , . ’ 

. or IS released, or migrates. 

* (262). No Spirit is bound ; not any migrates ; nor is any 
emancipated. Nature alone, having many rcccptacles (bodily 




[ 263 ] 


106 


[k. LXin— lxiv.] 


forms of being), is bonnd, migrates and is released. Bondage, 
migration and release are ascribed to the Spirit, in the same 
manner as defeat and victory are attributed to, the king, 

* though actually occurring to his soldiers ; because it is the 
servants that take part in the undertaking, the effects of 
which — gain or loss — accrue to the king. In the same 
manner, experience and release, though really belonging to 
Nature, are attributed to the Spirit, on account of the non- 
discrimination of Spirit from Nature. Thus the objection 
above urged loses all its force. 

(263). Objection: — We understand that bondage, migra- 
tion and release, are ascribed to the Spirit ; but of what good 
are these to Nature? 

We reply ; — 

KAkikA LXIII. 

Nature by herself binds herself by means of seven 

Nature binds and forins ; she causcs deliverance for the 
^ t)enefit of the Spirit, by means of 

developments. o,je ^^^1. 

“ Nature binds herself by means of seven forms ” ( i. e. 
dispositions) all the properties of Buddhi, save discriminative 
wisdom. For the benefit of the Spirit she releases herself by 
herself, by means of one form, viz., discriminative wisdom.^ 
That is to say, she does not again bring about the experience 
or emancipation of the same Spirit. 

Objection: — ^We grant all this. What then ? 

KarikI LXIV. 

Thus it is that by the practice of truth, Avisdora is 
attained, Avhicli is complete, incon-* 

The form and oha- . ^ 

racterofdiscrimiDa- ti’overtiblc, (and hence) pure, and 

tivc wisdom. i i i . i i 

absolute (by means of winch the 
idea is obtained that) “ I am not, naught is mine, aiidT I 
do not exist.” 



[ 264 ^ 267 ] 


107 


[K. Lxnr..] 


(264). The word “ truth ” indicates the knowledge thereof. 

By means of practice of troth, in the manner described above, 
through a long course of repeated, uninterrupted and respectful 
exercise of true knowledge, the wisdom manifesting the dis- 
tinction of Spirit from Matter, is attained. All exercise 
brings about the knowledge of its object, so in the present 
case the exercise being one of troth results in the cognition 
thereof. It is for this reason of its leading to truth that the 
knowledge is called pure. 

(266). Why pure ? Because “ incontrovertible ” (or unmis- 
taken). Doubt and error are the two im- 
w£m^«S[ataeS!® parities of knowledge ; and the above 
knowledge being free from these is said to 
be pure. Doubt consists in thinking a decided fact to be 
undecided ; and as such it is only a form of error. Thus by 
saying, “ hence incontrovertible" the absence of both doubt and ' 
contradiction is implied ; this absence being due also to Ihe 
fact of the exercise belonging to truth. 

(266). Objection We grant all this, but the eternal 
tendency towards false knowledge is sure to bring abouL its 
results in the shape of false knowledge, which will lead to its 
inevitable effect, the miseries of metempsychosis, of which 
thus there would be no end. , 


In reply to the above, it is declared “ Absolute" i.e., unnlixed 
with error. Though tendency towards error 
plained”*^”** ** eternal, yet it is capable of removal by 
means of true wisdom, though this has a 
beginning in time. For partiality towards truth is natural to • 
Buddhi, as declare also outsiders (here, the Bauddhas) : “ No 
amount of contradiction can set aside the flawless (knowledge 
of) the character of objects, for such is the partiality of 
Buddhi." , 


(267). *The form of the cognition is stated : — I am not, 


*The form of the 
knowledge. 


naught is mine, and / do not exist. am 
not' merely precludes the possibility of 
action from the Spirit. As is declared 



[^ 6 ^ 269 ] 


108 


[k. ixv.] 


(by grammarians), “ The root As together with Bhu and Kri 
signify action in general.” Hence all actions, external as well 
as internal! determination, self-consciousness,, reflection, 
observation, &e., are all precluded from the Spirit. And 
since there is no action of the Spirit, there arises the idea that 
“I am not” *‘I” hero implies agency, such ns in “I give,” 
“I eat,” &c.; and no snch agency can belong to the Spirit 
who is without any action. And from this follows the idea 
that naught is mine" For it is only an agent that can have 
any possession ; and hence the preclusion of action implies 
that of possession as well. 

f! 

Or we may interpret the three forms in another way. The 
sentence “ I do not exist,” means that “ I am the Spirit, not 
productive and because non-productive “ I have no action ” 

^ — ‘ I am not ’ ; and since without action, “ I can have no 
possessions, ” hence “ naught is mine. ” 

(268) . Objection : — Eveu after such a knowledge, there 
might be left something yet unknown, which would lead to re- 
birth. 

We reply : — “ It is complete" i. e., there is nothing left un- 
known after the attainment of such knowledge as the above. 
Hence there is no re-birth. 

(269) . Question : — What is accomplished by this know- 
ledge of truth ? 

We reply 

KAhikA LXV. 

Possessed of this knowledge, Spirit, as a spectator, 
pure, at leisure and at ease, beholds 

The cause of the , . , , , . 

cessation of Nature’s hlaturc, which has now revcrtcd from 

operation. ^ Seven forms (to her primitive ' 

state) after her prolific fruition has ceased, under the 

force of true wisdom. 

The two things for the production of which Nature had 
begun action were experience and the perception of truth ; and 



[270] . 


109 


[k. lxvi.]- 


when these two have been accomplished there is nothing left 
to be done, and hence Nature ceases from prolhc activity. 

“ Under the force (of true wisdom)." The seven forms — 
Virtue, &c. — are all dne to erroneons knowledge. Dispassion, 
too, of those who have it through mere contentrhent, is dne to 
erroneons knowledge. And this erroneous knowledge is 
removed by its contradictory — true knowledge. And thus 
the cause, erroneous knowledge, being removed, its effects, 
the seven forms are also removed, and hence from these 
Nature desists. 

“ At ease, ” *. e.. Inactive ; “ Pure " t. e., Unmixed with the 
impurities of Buddhi, dne to the Attributes, — though to the 
last moment the Spirit continues to be in contact with the 
Attribute of Goodness ; or else no (perception, and hence no) 
wisdom would be possible. 

(270). Objection ; — Let this be so. We have nothing to 
say against your statement as to Nature desisting from pro- 
ductions. But the production has been said to be due to the 
connection (of Spirit and Matter) ; and this connection is only* 
a form of capability ; and the capability to experience Cbn- 
stitutes the intelligence of the Spirit, as the capacity of being 
the object of experience constitutes the non-intelligence and 
objectivity of Nature ; and these two*capabilitie8 can never be 
vsaid to cease ; and yon cannot urge that they cease, because 
there is nothing left to be done, for though one set of objects 
has been experienced by the Spirit, there are others of the same 
kind still to be experienced. (Thus no emancipation is 
possible). 

We reply : — 

KArikA lxvi. 

■* “ She has been seen by me,” says the one and so 

No birth • after retires j “ I have been seen,” says the 
““0"* wint^'S and. ceases to act. Hence 

though there is still their conjunction, 
it affords no motive towards further creation. 



110 


[k. lxvi.] 


[271—272] 

(271) . So long as nature has not manifested truth, she 
may bring about the enjoyment of the various objects of 
sense ; but she cannot do this after she has opce brought 
.about discriminative wisdom. For experience is due to 
erroneons knowledge, and when this latter, the cause, has 
ceased under the force of wisdom, there can be no enjoyment ; 
just as the sprout is iTot possible in the absence of the seed. 
The Spirit mistakes the various objects of sense — the modifica- 
tions of Nature — to belong to himself. And discriminative 
wisdom also is a modification of Nature, and as such is taken 
by the Spirit to belong to himself. When however such 
wisdom has been brought about, the connection of the Spirit 
with Nature ceases, and so he ceases to feel. Nor is the Spirit 
by himself capable of bringing about discriminative wisdom, 
which is a development* of Nature. And the Spirit who has 
attained to wisdom, cannot accept any purpose as his own. 

. And farther, experience and emancipation being the purpose 
of the Spirit, supply the motive to the operations of Nature ; 
but when these two have ceased • to be the purpose of the 
Spirit, they cease to be motives also. With this view it is 
defiihred — “ There is no motive, &c.” A motive is that which 
moves Nature to act towards creation ; and tliis is not 
possible, when there is no purpose of the Spirit. 

(272) . Objection', — We grant all this. But no .soonei;. 
would wisdom be attained than the body would dissolve ; and 
then how could the bodiless Spirit behold Nature (as distinct 

. from himself) ? If it be asserted that emancipation does not 
follow immediately on the attainment of wisdom, on account 
of the unspent residuum of Karma — then we ask, — how is 
this residuum destroyed ? If by mere fruition (j. e., by experi- 
• ence), then you tacitly imply the inability of wisdom alone to*, 
bring about emancipation. And hence the assertion «■ that 
“emancipation follows from a knowledge of the* distinction 
between the Manifested, the , Unmanifested, and the Spirit 

* Because wisdom is a property of Bnddhi which is an emanation from 
Nature. 



[273] . 


Ill 


[k. lxvii.] 

becomes meaningless. And the hope too — that emancipation 
would be obtained on the destruction of the residua of Karma, 
by means of experience extending to a limitless period of time 
— ^is too san^ne ever to be realised. 

To this we reply : — 

. KArikA lxvii. 

By the attainment of perfect wisdom, Virtue and 

„ . , the rest become devoid of causal 

Reason why the 

body does not dis- energy ; yet the Spirit remains awhile 

Bolve immediately , ^ ^ ^ 

on the attainment invested with body, as a potter’s wheel 
continues to revolve by the force of 
the impulse previously imparted to it. 

(273). The unlimited residua of Karma also having their 
prolificness destroyed by the force of true knowledge, they do * 
not lead to any further experience. The seeds of action produce 
sprouts only on the ground of Buddhi, damp with the waters 
of pain. The ground, liowever, becomes barren by having its 
dampness of pain dried up by the extreme heat of true wisdom, 
and hence the Karmic seeds cease to sprout forth into experi- 
ence. With this view it is said — “ Virtue and the rest become 
devoid of caused energy T Even when wisdom has been 
attained, the body continues for a y^ile, on account of the 
previous impulse ; just as even after the action of the potter 
has ceased, the wheel continues to revolve on account of the ' 
momentum imparted to it. In due time, however, the impulse 
having exhausted itself it stops. In the continuance of the 
body, the impulse is supplied by virtue and vice whose fruition 
has already commenced, as is declared by S'ruti — “ Other 
(actions) having been destroyed by .itself experience, the soul 
'attains beatitude” and “The delay is only so long as beatitude 
is not attained ”[ CMdwflfoyycs VI, i, 2]. This impulse (or 
impression) is a peculiar one, in which all illusion has been 
destroyed ; and in consequence of this impulse, the Spirit re- 
mains awhile invested with the body. 



[274—276] 112 [k. i-xvni— Lxa.] 

(274). Question this be so : if the Spirit remains 

invested with body by some sort of impnlse, when will be his 
final release ? 

• « 

We reply : — 

KAbikA LXVIII. 

When the separation of the informed Spirit from his 
&rporeal framed at length takes place, 

Final beatitnde. „ ’ , ^ . 

and Nature ceases to act in respect to 
it, then is final and absolute emancipation accomplished. 

The prolificness of those actions, whose fruition has not 
commenced, being destroyed, and those also whose" fruition 
has commenced, having been spent by experience, Nature has 
her purpose fulfilled, and hence ceases with respect to that 
particular Spirit, who thus obtains absolute and eternal cessa- 
tion of the, triad of pain, 

(276). Though the doctrine has been proved by reasoning, 
yet in order to inspire respect towards ^t, the precedence of 
the great llishi is stated : 

« KArikA LXIX. 

This abstruse knowledge adapted to the emancipa- 
tion of the Spirit, wherein the origin 
duration, and dissolution of beings are* 
considered, has been thoroughly ex- 
pounded by the great Rishi. 

“ Abstruse^' i. e., hard to be grasped by dull-brained people. 

“ By the great liishi ” i. e., by Kapila. 

The feeling of reverence thus ronsed is strengthened by 
basing the doctrines on the Veda: “ Wherein are considered^'" 
4-c.” i. in which knowledge (e. e., for the sake of which 
knowledge).* These, origin &c., are also considered in the 
Veda. 


As ID Charniani dviplnam haatix 



113 


[k. lxx— wxn. 


[276—278] 

(276) . Let this be so : We shall respect the direct sayings 
of the great Rishi (Kapila) ; wherefore should we pay attentioa 
to the assestions made by Isvarakrishna ? 

We reply : — 

KArikA LXX— LXXI. 

• t 

This supreme, purifying (doctrine) the sage imparted 
to Asuri, who taught it to Panchasikha, 
Bcienw ***”'**”* **** whom the science was extensively 

propagated. 

Handed down by tradition of pupils, it has been 
compendiously written in AryS, metre by the noble- 
minded Tsvarakrishna who has thoroughly investigated 
the truth. 

Purifying, purifying the Spirit from all sins, the canse 
of the triad of pain. 

Supreme, i. e., chief among all purifying doctrines. 

(277) . “ Arya = that which has arrived at truth ; one whose 
intellect is such is called Aryamati.” 

(278) . This science is a whble in itself, — not a mere 
' section — ^because it treats of all branches of knowledge ! — 

KAkika LXXII. 

The subjects that are treated of in the seventy distiches 
are those of the complete science 

of *'’^**’* comprising sixty topics, exclusive of 

* illustrative tales, and omitting con- 

• troversies. 

• 

^ The sixty topics are thus laid down in the PAja- Vartika : 
1 The existence of Prakriti ('Karikh XIV) ; 2 its singleness 
(XIV) ; 3 Objectiveness (XI) ;4 Distinctiveness (of Spirit from 
Matter) (XI) ; 5 Subserviency (of Matter to Spirit) (XVII) j 



114 


6 Plurality (of spirits) (XVIII) ; 7 Disjunction (of Spirit from 
Matter in the end) (XX) ; 8 Conjunction (of Spirit and Matter 
in the beginning) (XXI) ; 9 Relation of subserviency (of 
Matter with Spirit) (XIX^ ; 10 Inactivity (of the Spirit) (XIX) ; 
these are the ten radical categories. ( In addition to these) are 
the five kinds of error (XLVII),' nine of contentment (L), and 
twenty-eight of disability of the organs (XLIX) ; these, 
together with the eight sorts of power (LI), make up the sixty 

topics.” All these sixty topics are treated of in the above 
seventy distiches, which therefore form a complete science and 
cannot be said to be only a portion thereof. 

Of the above (ten radical categories), singleness, objectivity, 
and subordination relate to Nature ; distinctness, inactivity and 
plurality to Spirit ; and existence, disjunction, and conjunction 
to both ; and existence of the relation of subserviency relates 
to gross bodies also. 

May this work of Vachaspati Misra, the Tattva^Kaumudi 
(the Moonlight of Truth), continue to please (cause to bloom) 
the clear (lily-like) hearts of good men ! 

Thus ends the Tattva-Kaumudt of Vachaspati Misra. 


ALPHABETICAL INDEX 


page:. 

Abhiniv<56a (Tenacity of Life) 

[212] 90 

Ahank&ra ( Sclf-Gonsciousncss ) 

[149] 05 

AsmitS (Egoism) [209] 90 

Astral Body [189] ... ... 81 

Attachment (Bdga) [210] ilO 

Avidyfi, (Ignoi-ance) [208] ... 89 

Aviseshf ( Non-specific, gi*oss ) 

[184] 79 

Avyakta (Unmanifested) or Pra- 
kriti — Proofs of, [110] ... ... 40 

Bondage — three kinds of, [200] ... 86 

Buddhi (will) [l43] 62 

„ „ Relations of [60] ... 27 

Contentment [317] 92 

Creation-author Of [241] 98 

„ Elemental [242] ... 98 

„ Intellectual [206] ... 89 

„ Production of pain [248]. 99 

„ Process of [141] 61 

Disability [214] 91 

Effect an Entity [62-76] ... ... 23 

Ounas (attributes) [97-101] ... 40 

„ Character of the [103] ... 42 

Jealousy [217] 92 

Manas (mind) consideration of 

[155] 67 

Means and Consequences [196] ... 84 


PAGE. 

Organs — the three internal [160] 70 

Pain — three kinds of [4] 2 

Perception— causes of incapacity 

of [64-56] 24 

Prakriti — cessation of the activi- 
ties of [258] ••• 103 

Prakriti — modu% operandi of [116]. 51 
Prakriti — operation of the insen^ 

twiU, [254] 101 

Prakriti’s want of a PurusAa 

[138]. ... ... •*. 60 

Proofs— consideration of [30] ••• 13 

„ defined [22-23] 10 

„ Enunciated [25] 11 

Purusha (Spirit)— consideratiofi of 

[119-125] 62 

Puruslia — characteristics of [130- 
134] ... ••• ••• ... 58 

Sense-organs [163] ... ♦ ... 66 

Senses — object of the [17Q ... 76 

„ relative preilominance [179] 76 

Syldhis (Powers) [229] 94 

Time [175] ^ ... 76 

Visesha (specific) [185] 79 

Vyaktaarid A differences 

between [77] 36 

Vyakta emd Avyakta — ^points of 
agreement between, [88] ... 37 

Wis<lom — production of [264] ... 107 




(?TI^ « ■) 








HOT I 





JWiTftlflT 


?w»rew '‘a?ff^^’’5nr5( 3a[®r?hira^9ft?tT ^ i 



I 9W|T2q% f%5^- 

jTofi: ftto5i5t<T^*i<»®iT*Tre(^ m^sw 

mcq^Srwjn: sn^rr «fr*T5?JT'mnf^ms?nf^ \ 

aTT9'tl'?RT jftf^5FT^i4^?ra- 
#r?re?wr'^ i?ig‘'«<»«sT^^?if??r:«ftf^f- 

ffir ?Trnsii«ieT%^i^WFWnwf^f^3rafrq.i jrt: 
3^^«Tf^T?(Wr towjgfKs^irirTsit «r|^: fftrofter i 

a:^5T ^ ^ f^Rqn^, *iif$|siTft ‘ * %j(^ 

siiq^tr*r nimoWr'pq^t 2ri^?qi%: i «o«^- 

f?Ri«45rr’eri^Ts?«rf^iTf(nsqO ^r-^^qfinlr- 
f«r3T ?«I§*Tl*lT-s|»RfsifT^cJI^^?Ili; « 

*T|TWT Jff^SFSTrim ^ I araiPi fJrPi5n?Tt?[ 

“ srrm ” ( w*T(fr ) Hntt, ^ *iw?fR[1rq>: frT?»*rf sreraifir 
ffNfS I ??tqrari%qR>Ti%5iT‘?l[(TJr5r^w^HfJir^55i5gpi%^*J3it^jn^^^ 
<TfirnT3R^qfrrf^mf^<iftrn5i^i*fr %qT55BT??f ^lI^^>sw«^^• 

I fiKinTr<« 5n:^r|5rr gnflsaw I ?w«9 “ 

^ wr i anr«i 

^if^3t^-»liJ[tj5q>R>^«T*ft^r«i3:?qiwfcrqiq;Tr qfJrss:, 

5r??[5fr’irr^55:, 3TfR?i?JT«pR?TT?q?fq!nf 
«qr?Tqfq7<?'^rff| srqr^ftr i 

3lhi-(fiasr5ftJi ^«??qrqi<w??rg:(i)-f^n5|: in¥:^fJrT93Rq^*FFn ^R- 
qiRR?! ^^"isRr srr^fH §orfti5?r^ ft5«rr»i. i w^— 

55?Nt*[er: wirPr’ ^fsigisit 

^wrP=snft«»ftcltf^?f^ ^i^'^r>T55?f«Rr*TqRlr& ir^qwlrcT i 

. •?T«if^ fJri^($^-‘r%»TicifH>i^’-nwi?gr%wrqf ^frqf:-"^r’^3ft’SPil«f- 



firwT^?Ririt^^5t5 <T5!rn55Trf?5 «w^rf Br 55 «lftfH «g- 
I srt: 55 ^ »nwft?forr*J3s?Rg5ct*r * 41 ^ 5 ??*?^- 

1 3TSr *r5^ 2fl^saiftiT!i.jp«i- 
HfTsPT ^sirfit 55ft35?sp!T g*w<K^«i3«i?w- 
^ ww4iw«r. *t^- 

^ «$r^n'^5RTw'^W5(T; 1 5rsfefm% ^ it?it feftpn^ gfemPr ^ 
5^?nBtfH I fiRfW sj»iw ^q55T<n5*TiwKfnir «rr5i»?r 

Vhsw^T: I ire^r^rf^w argqss^^jwrsPr ^wfirfir- 
«i?!r Irer Rcfr ;5[?fmT:, 1 

H?«rl!a?rr’^«Tr!^«Bn^siifi[r^^^3fsiTr^q^ q«nm% •Rir ^ 

af l^s^t 5?in»i5, i??i355 ll 

arPT *TfR*i^’t Ji»ir. "^iSiffT *Tm?iT 

" ?is!TPnrf8r«FT. < 1 )-?TW?r*fi9r. ( ^ )-irf^T^5?fv?: ( \ Hiwinr. 
( V )-Hif9!l.( '^ )-^PTf. ( ^ ( « )-f*nfwr^: ” 

II ?T5r ( n ) ?JrrJT^foR>RT5ft ir»«5rfil«l!F5TM''Trf\'R- 
ajiWTSfin swfiii1^f^5!T«rra?F^ra^ gncg^ii ( ) jiw- 

fr%i ii ( ^ ) jreff^-.-gfeifisq^ r<!it^i%%: 

II ( V ) ;^lr^r^I^&qfi^fTf^T^- 

, (RRseirr?5!nf:'n-5?TiT35^'fTts?i5 

Asra*i>R9^«Ji»!TT^«fg WE#<Trf^r«iif%:«*i3ff-'ir*THnwRfT5itj: 11 

X ^ ) ?rr^!i?ref'ti5<t ii ( ^ ) ?refl5ir?Xt, ^Rraqrfr^si^ R|5t 

5ftm II ( '» ) RriRfl^-wscRTO<RniR«R^^-gft(iR^f^^«Tfit- 
^ifJpTORf^ll 

/ R!T5ft?Rfllf5l^RWRlTR?nj?IFm>in3RTarTRR!RfJR«^3fl^R5r^fRW- 
(^ri^cRTR sn^TRtr ftcqrnirf^ 1 wr ^ 

RffRRf^q ?frgaq!Rft^wfiT^ qgq^iflsfw 11 wrsPt 
55!Ri!=qf RjsRW 5^raffT<^ fftT R'Jsg gf^ra: ^wfeairt, «'K- 

^ r: qf^«wg gfcwr^af a 

. qwf WR^W* 1 fRr«R5TO'J55ign?ni^5- 

, > wq*irRq;«frRTft»fatnnf«lagiF«n row: 

1 fsrf J ^fNfniro*. 





ftwr: S0Tf[: 

1 infST^nr^ ^ 

••• ••• ••• ^ 

^ 

V jiJa^piegtqi^ ... ’I 

«?ihi% 

% ^tf:T<Tf^f^)rT^5 ... X 

^ 

< 5rrir(^«r?if3firrm«rt ft- 
fftqrssq^t 

s anqPnft^rqi^'q^-^qf- 

i« '^fir#Trq^ 

qifims^^qJT ... 

11 qT^qift6iqT»r*r^^. 

11^ ^fHtqrqw HlfiRTqtq- 
qq<^*T^ ... ... 

,1X q?rq^«^fH9(RqCT 
j ^*ftqgi^inB?q5 ... 

IV qirerf^qq^nTPr 

•*• ••• 

I'l qjrftqiT^n^: 

1 % nTq?rRf^t«q(^ti#i^. 


f^*n: 

wiiftw \. 

iv» qrr«?f$q: \» 

IV q^Riqfsqsrsr ••• ••• ^ 

11 ... » 

f^fhspiq^ V 

^1 q?ftr^?i3*Tq^- 

qwqji tf 

am®r?fTRr5?B??Bf^ ... < 

\\ Jwrqqq^Hsr^ ... v 

IV qumti^ 1 

imr>i!iqqft*nn*t^ ... i 
HRnq«wssf4nw5t9!T, 

fTcqftf r?:«( i 

:^v» q^qrg^jn^qqrm^q- 

"reqiaR?Tq«q*l. ... i 
qv qnftqnqisJKirqftq^- 

*1^3* •*•• • • • ••* 1 

qi JwmnTf Mqsy^. i 
fl?q^R5^rqqqT4: ... 10 
\i iriqHW%?nTCTJT ... i« 

11 

■ 3 ??^ 11 

\ •rjjrrqjrrwwrtrm^ ii 

\ ai3*ii*r«rmHr3TO‘** H 





?TWai 5 


>'* 

«(tm?ftni;^3RTSTw 







... 



fraft WTff, 


Vo 

5fr5^siJTr®r55^®i^^^ • • • 

n 

VI 

sTTm^w. 

n 

t\ 

'^NrsRisfRT^- 



... ... 

n 


animmraf^WTff ... 

IV 

vv 

anH#f3*n’TRfrf^?:. 

iv 

v»^ 

5rrwT^?rTfiiwi®Ft ^cr^ir* 



5%#^r!?T*if^: ... 

IV 


?rqiHrw 5i^ffTT^ 



'^p«nii?f: 

nv 

vv» 


1H 

v< 

ar^nwrw iT?T^?(T«fr^: 


v\ 

«wTWT3»Tr^s?ff«fRr: 


Ho 

iBTniR^*tR:. 

•n 


wuftarr 


HI 

nirniRif^Pf'ifti: 

1C 

H^ 

3T<fH5!wn>rf ernRi^- 



TOra[5«irsTRCRr'fw... 

I'* 

H\ 

sTjflrmf^t^siwrnwii^ 



ftftr: 

1\» 


«f^T'S. 


HV 

tRq^RTflJl, WTHTf^- 



HTimra^rfi. 

1« 

HH 





1^ 


fl^m: S^fT' 


H^ 

aT3?t?T^ n?i^^ 

«^\S 



«IITft«BT <2. 


Hc 

BSTrsTrsTas^ It^-wi 



••• ••» 

i\ 

H^ 

ii«[isi?n«rsTr35<»iTf^ 



«RTJif(8r 

1<V 




%o 

?RT?f5KTr>I9*^ ^Tf^- 



t%iifinm*i: 

IS 


a*TR«NH5 

IS 



So 

M 

... 

So 

^v 

l5fT5?r«Tnf5RW 

s* 

^H 




I^JTr I3:, 3TH- 



?r: ... 

So 





ass^ssTr fljfftgt 


«i'« 




*ii% 

SI 






SI 





^5* ••* **• 


\»o 

w^^otr^ivnarr^j 

ss 

'»1 

^;Tr«nift»iTiT- 



... ... 

u 

\»^ 

?rfh «BTT»ian<mw- 




sv 





\ 


\»X 1 

'Tw‘«i«n^ ... vt 

\»V q2ti5?«T?qft^ip?J?T- 
i?fTr«i 

... X'^ 

^^^ ..; ... 


?o. 

\»V» ellTRISilTfi^^CqqPI!!^., X'^ 

N»s arOrjiTtf >1 ( ^ ) ... 

<o 3t5!nf^5(X) ... 

<«i "* ) ... ’IS 

3T^<?H.(^) ... \\ 

<\ 3ITf«RRW«5^( ^ ) ••• 

«v fef?9rH ('») ... 

( « ) ... 

<S ’nr(T?5R^( ^ ) ... ’IS 

C\» araiTRFI5«l%>wJt%’rtt- 

••• ••• 


«tf « i x f>i a i^qr^w[WT^.. ’^'» 
<\ ?T^ 1 ) ... S'* 

So arf^r^r^^ < s ) ... s» 

M ^ ) 0Tm5lR4 

- ^'» 

H) ... S<s 
M JW^srtJrt^il. < S ) ••• s< 
<y 5qwr»»kTirE?T%sf?r^5i: s« 
SRPra^SR^ts 3Wt- 




s< 


... ... 

^'* ^®i ... ... 

’Wfq^f»rr^f:<i?»T^- 
... ... ... SS 

^^ 3SF55^fWI5^q: ... ss 

^oo goFfl^sR^-Ji^^raf- 

... 

lol 5»lf^?lT:-3Tai!;^f5ro- 
^rsmiT'iHfJrgsif- 

ss 


•\o\ 2onraTH5:<TO5 i’?r^T*5- 


^1^1 ®Rc^ ... ... 

lov ^2<n^m«r: i ^E**wf 

i^'gra^ ... !.. xs 

s a^5"F?5r»nw: i 

... ... .•• 


S»S 


2»iHt tR^f^^ilrsftT 



5- 


IS 


«rft«Fr w. 

^oc a?st2*j^fliaRT»i.««^Rr- 
fi^f^r^nrewT- 


^carsr|T 




• •• 


• •• 


• • • 





ftviT: SBIfT: 


n*^ 1 5 <iin?ri^ti%- 


?qTf^riRTOr ... 


aieilW^RJJ, 



* , 

m 3?aTTiiq:5qqT%q«f5rfr.. 


in’^ ?Rqr??Tr: 1 q!i$qqr«ti%- 


*»T>r: JWqt ^ 5 : (n) 


m ^#n5«iff:?Wsq- 




(’t) 


^ 1 V q??I?Jf 5 Wq$ 5 ?TW qft- 


fjm<q5 (\) 


ii'n ?i*i5qjiT%t% (V) ... 


qRTftw 


JR*^: nn%nq!R: 1 %- 


2«t?t:0) 


nnvs 


qft»n*i?r^ (X) ...* 


RRif^r 


3 Wft«T?qHi«RTfir ... 


?mr?Tqn«l?qT^ ( 1 ) 


?mreiqf»qn»^qsqq 


wpqf^: 


f^rw^qf^inn- 


(q) ... 


I^X (X) ... 


I’^v qtqiqw?qmf!qR*L... 

XC. 

I’l'n XRWrt 


ftfir(v) 

u 


firm* 

«lR<nl K^m 
3^|?TOW^ ... \< 

... \< 

s^'>rrR3»nTOT^rfHir 

C*^)*** ... ... 

^ fkx x 

<i\o ...‘ ... 

•iA** ^RTftw?«iw*P«ra^- 
••• ••• ••• 

5^^eTf|Rf55|?^^ Vo 
>, ... Vo 

„ *TI«R«?T*[ ... Vo 

»mqf^5i«CT ... v«» 
'^^«i 3fK5f?in5tT 

qftfrr. vi 

’wftw Rt 


nX'» S5^n«n*iqt: «sr vn 

’\\^ iWH^qpqr^ ... vn 
nx'^ %q^T^?L q^qr- 



v\ 

nvn ^p^qw! ... ... ... 
nv^ ?pin^wit nqwN ^- 

... ... ... v^ 



f^wr: SSTfr: 

... 

ivv 5f«{3^ff vx 

5R8sr»if:>w4irRnpi:... 
^lirr^fr: ... 

iv\» a?sf^5«r: vv 

^vc ... vv 

«T?Srrg!??«iT«j^ ><•< 

«rifrww4$fr: ... 

5"r^<n?ffrw?i i>wc- 

VH 

vK 

... 

^nrft«w ^vs. 

IHOT 5f^^>ffW?»T- 


^ ... 

... vs 

*Rr55TO ... 

... vs 


... v« 


p- ■ 


Vv» 

• •• ^ ^ 

^fi:«r*r«rq?w qtsRr. v^^ 




... V^J 

%Ti^w. 


1^0 aT?tr:^riJf^Jl: 

... 

3i5n:w”iHi»l.Wf?2- 

Wff^J ... 

... VC 


fgTir: 

^>rfi?RT V. 

n?#3- 

*nT|f^ : vtf 

„5iriT^ff^: 

af??r:%r>?5r?iw 

1 ^r*it ft?T: YS 

3tf;fr^nw'»rq; ... vs 
!W^*TTR%fl*f^srq 2^- 

'\o 

q n ft«i>i 

^r>rfl*iFr: v 

••• ■•• ••• 

1\so qs^oMniirqftimq ... V 
\\. 

iw*) 

. Or*n»r: 'M 

... 

jfT«f>r>ir’tt ?5?«rRf5. 'm 
i'»v irr9n5tTT^f"r^»% ... 
i'»^ ^55W ?r?^??RWT*nf: 
^^«FT ^a. 

^vsvj 5ifr^[?rf^^?iT: ... 

^vstf 

.’)«s 9i55r:«R?ornft iiwi5!i?. 

< i » T fi:^ ?^.- 
3T5iT:^25t: 









^q53[*Tj 


Hf % 

'»<’>. BWI5!WmsTfT ... \i 
aiq^if^fT ^?If?qTTf^r 
pr?r?^5 \x 

qnftq^r 

ItfV arf^^WJT^ '\'\ 

»^»^ 

^C\ 

«wfbi7r 

levs 3rBT5?Tff^W5«R«T ... '^% 

^^rmPrasrqt^^: ... w 

«rftq:r a®. 

\<% q[^q*ia^td<wf^«r ... 

1\0 ^^HorfsT^iT. 

^'» 

'iTBff^Brf^r- H'* 

?ICT^ ^'S 

„ JTfTHSS^ ^ »TOF5. ^'» 

^rrftqjr «?. 

^ qRrftaFT «^. 

„ ««T8rf3: Jf^- 

V 

WJw^f¥^q!f^»n»p.... '^^ 
IS'* 5t^ftc«r5«^^ftw>?q 

s'^ 


f^qqr: 

«h R«ct a«. 

istf Pifimf^^qroif ^i#r- 

Hs 

-^ss «nft^Tw^ir*r*TT<t’L 

nfn^TTiRsr^ ... ss 

^o* ... «,<» 

’los ln»qr^ ... 

xs’i ci5r«nJiig[ ... s'* 

... 

^rftwav 

?r»n^Bf*i=T5 ... 

„ Bs?ralt^Bi«rsT5 ... «ii 

qsrftw a\9. 

\\ 

wftqrra-ir. 

^o<j ar^niT arg^vRB^... 

^oS ar^BWiqr 

’.n* CPPR ... 

3if5rf^$)Bfqrer?5r- 

M 

ft B 4q r q igff W gBfe» 
jsrqfe ... t 

a^. 

BPW? 





•V9 


5f^Pl^3FqTS5tf^: 

■^1^ 5t: 9T?inT5rf%: ?tH7* 

^iV 

^ r fctRT «\o. 

Vi'* *fI«fft'Tgfe^5T5 ... «tV 
^i«s ^^qran^tnigi^w- 
... ... ... 
nw 5ffe:-3?*:*i: ... 

f5?ft?Tr-«f^35g: ... 

a<ft«ir-aTR: ... ... 

’^5«ff-f%: 

w\ 'wrw«r^rw3f«^5TiEr. 

St«TqT-»nT^ %%. 



atft?n-w»Trrg;. ... 

... 

twift-TwrrwT: ... %\ 

S\. 

•^w %\ 

B«rqT 3J«ni5^^ X'* 

fl[?ftin gjrnrg. x® 
^xx ^r g:5W mciarc^ %'» 
^Vt '53«ft gf?iiTf?re?ir r- 

*=«n5: X« 

nx^ XH?;^ flxrg^- 
® ••• ••• ••• 

^X«i 5:xwxt^«ji<T«qifeT«: 

XX'* ^Nftpiwxfw 8I^ 

»1rtw x< 


fxw: 3®Tfr: 

XX« ft#Tr5tT%ga'T5Tt 

••• ••• x< 

Vx^ 3r*iOT*if^xxic5raft ... x^ 
xvo 3»wft«re»r??R!racfax- 

^*1^. . . ... ... XX 

X'i^'» !?*prrgr^if ar^iiNrw- 

oftw^iR: XX 

^Tftxsr \\. 

^?r»fr%*n»r: xx 

X^^X ^SBTW '»o 

XW ^»<fr5T: <rarfx<x: ... »» 
xv'^ mgr w>«r: v»* 

^fftXRT «»«. 

»Tr»m*T*[ ... *. «o 

xvvi- 3>st^ ?t^IX5rr55T:, RV& 
r OT f ^ igr:, ar'xxm- 
^n^r7^5tra^: .%. '»* 

XCTftsn’«i«x. 

xvc ?t^x!r 5:>a|g?rr .... '*• 

x^x BTw<T|:?rT^ 

«W|'X: ... ^ ... wn 

gxt 2:xn>aifwq: ... '*\ 

«iX 

x^x nixfx!^XT5«»iTii*m5sr“ 

••• ••■ ••• 

^'xX MWfl«fe xx»t ( xqftgTx; '*x 



VK* 

?i?qft?Jir:-^frE«r^... 

(8f) <^crf^niwiR|r- 



i!irf^^<j. 
5wfl*ft?nfE[ Jivn»t^Pi 
y^f^* ••• ••« 

<j^. 

v\< ftr>^>wc«m5?R:fl: nsrr- 
wfbBT %o. 

V\\ V^. JRgqWr- 

• ••• ••• 

«i>rft3»r 

im- 

^|f^: '9>t 

SW?!i 

*ir^9ifr v.'^ 

ST'T^in '»^ 

n!F?qr ^- 

*i*ti 4lr??: '»'^ 

%H. 

\%'rt 3i«rwT^?rt^?tr^Rq%: 

'^S'^ 

^^ 5 ^ 15 : ••• ••• '*% 


f^w: 2Wfr.| 

fJtr^T !rr^nrnT«- 

... 

?rwgTH m <w>«T»T^ ... '»'» 

\\\ iTmi?irRiKTrK35 «'» 

^v»6 OffTinir 

irRr iiffti?rfT »« 

’^'»*» ?iOma: «<? 

grUW SWW'^f’TraR- 
sJTTJl.Rffil^TTtFJT- 

^t^^rfr '*\ 

nf^T^: '•V 

^'*v afR!n% ^?RTfS=?nn'?ii- 

... <• 

5tt9*wrefw ^nwf^yoft- 

••• ••• tfo 

vjo. 

... ... <1 

«•• ••• ••• 

crftwvs^. > 

^’•<5 ?rHfiTWft*l!Toif c# 







( 1 

•isiiirtjf Ji5ir: *mw: I 

«nir,^af 5«wmJ5R3r%5i?^ It 

iwy^t g*^ I 

qsgfiraira H ^ II 

^ ^ flR»Prtl«?w^ nftq K ftd f sq ^q^^4V 

IxaHd r ^ I 5 iri^* 

flifr«wi^«iM ^ ;: ^ ^ „r^rt, 

I ^ ^ JpaFT- 

HTcr: ^ | ?Rt snftPg- 

^nwRr — 

g: <war<fifi t tiidife r w4i n ?nrftira% i 

ire^sqniA ^I r wiwgF gRi i r t n 

“ 5 :^ ”^l <i4 5trerf^ ST *if^ 5 :sl siw 

smfcT ST gsr Sf (^crf^d^, te- 
* W ***^’’**’*^* ^' M m a<^«wqg^^ I ( arafsrag*#- 
• PrsTdiT^, d5%d- 

»«s<mPwts n g T ) I »iwqy % e ; ^ si^ ^ «ififtww v^mfd- 

^HTWcr il 


^ [^. cT. 

^ JT cnq|:^Rn% 

(V) w#i«imf ^ I S'-'SHt w S^i Wl«f 
«T?^- an’air^^,3TrMrf^, 

^ “ cPrrairfNi^ ^ I 

5irat ^Tcrf^lSSROif 


^<K f:^ig |«tT, { 

5 :^ 5r 5i?nw3H:,l 5 :^piWtr:“ 

qpcqq^T %cRra^: srf^^^c^sftqcM sfiWfq^ sf^cl 
I Sl^r^esMTqcq I q^JTQfvrc^ 

cjsfTfir 5f^*Pi: 5RFq: qijf^rgq%|qqi?ftwi^ I tR*ir- 
5^5, I a^q «nqra«R: 

a^qsnaqr: | p[qr ‘aV’ I 

a iqqr aq i^ I 5 : sEiT^ra^^, ai^ ^i?nq: li 
3 jq qrf^— ^r sqraf^g[” ^1 3 !q»n 5 ; | ^ af| 

('Os^T^qwwhn- ^ asq5» *^3 ^ 

jRq ^rrerf^qqqf- dw{^a > ^ ^T^at ■a ^rnira^q aqnrwf- 
f^^rarqrWqfqftr.u 

^d^ratqiq^q ag^q ;^ f^aRtqr^ a^aFi ^ 

araranaqi:, 

‘ * ^ ^Faf ^%r i%a^ qia I 
• i^ggfffa afetr ^ f^gR[ qeaarq^ ^ I 

\ 9»rf«^tqRq^fq l \inirew?icq^l _ 






^qftcgr: I JfPrtiwf^ Jicftw^q ^ ^ qr q^^ - 

sW^W^qrof^rsarf^K^^ q^tqir^- 

I cWT ssf^^^wrf^ *if&r*Fl^qqr^^q: 
Ji#qiT^q ffir II 

. f ^q > ^ — “q” I fclrf “t^SRRTTSRI^ S^T^Rj” I 

. ^ *‘i?qip^” 5-’^5^q^q«irq:; q»- 

(O lqe!fni%PnT- ^ „ r 'r 

wr arrjif^'WAiqf- i;r«hi^r<iq^qtwrq: “tfw^ieqsci^ SflT- 



.. „jr^ ^ ^ - — I N s. ■ c ^ .--. fs fv , , 

fwq fRqrsqrrcqqir^:^ Rq^wr^ aiqqjn^cqq^, h^- 
gq^rqf^^qr^ arqrfqPejqKqq^, ^ 

^ sqrq qr 5qi«^ 


q^ Jrqtqq^pq, CRTS^^ ?lcqft5^ 

clc^^qf^^ II \ II 


(<)'^ft:«RW5:9rq- qv§q^q?ciTqqq^qiF?iq3P<Rfr- 

qiqmqfwgqwqq?^ q>qfcr | “^qjfqqqt qila” |f^| 

ql'qsqf'Ti^: ii ^ 


. \ qtra: (^wnprq, vfiiflEfH) imr^rrel^: i anw, (nr? ( w- 

^5 ) 5«nq ( »n5 ), MlfqwinRrttf? inpf 5i^' i si9 5»?^ i ftift- 

qqi «r^*nq. I 



[ Hf. ft. 


n ^ jwiJRSfRg. I 

• ^ f!ft §?i[ ^:q5W3[*l,” ffft I 

[cFsfSITfS^] 

wjf: t ^ ^ mm e^^nfmq^fi 
5:^ 1 5 r ^1 fwr 5^ — 3 !qnr 

^ [ 3i«i^ftRg; ^] I cR^f^sf«tT^fif^*5fli?T:? 


f^Tfrer 53fRrf5irf — 

TOT^T^wflwt, H llHigP^ ' ^it Tr ft ^ il pg: I 
?iftqr5ft?r: ^ it 

1^1 3W5r^?55^ i 

(^)^f^*ic?iTr- f^«ifi’ 8^^ I m «rr3- 

iTHt 55«I- ?>f^:,cR SfT^ fRT|[fH*n^ 1 3n3?t^# 

^ ^ ^q f t r P^ g R rgr- 

«T^” gniFiTnRR, cnnft 

f^^ gR^ i R i^gifl^RRTg; I fi«ir ^ — “ sort m ^ 

fTcf5*i: fll^TfiR:” [f5?T^^], “5f ^ JSRR^ sf 

^ [ST'dR] ^ li 

RRT Sffh?Rt|pIf-*‘ 9 I “r^- 

»I^: aif^5(|{???ltftR- *WT S55 R RRI 5 . WRl^dl'^IM:— ' R- 
II 5 CR^: .RiR^R: RiRRrI:” | *R.- 
9Rf^ » 3%W*frf^3F*R: SRRTg^R ’T^fW^SpUR 



% 




ssf^sn I ‘^rqft?re:,» ^qerr sf^ jn^i- 

fe%sT I 3W 

gwrH^ 4ftq r ^^» T^ e I ci«Tr sf^ 

( 5 if^® 5 cwr ) ^ 51 % ” | 

f| 5oq?r*iiilr^?i^%>?mpK3rmff^: qrq- 

*fi^q?trf^i 5:^sRf|;q»f^ng[ ii 

5r 'q — “qr ff^ qwM^n<?i ^q_ 

(1 qrflrqif^qnir * siifi’qtjftq q^qic^^ ” 

3iPiJf^tg?f«iq^q. « qr«qci — ^ f^Rt^rarcT^I 

f| ^^tm ^ I q %5 t% f^Rifl- 

wqrg^l a«Tr.lt — “qr f|^” ^fci f|^ ar^tj. 

Igqr^ fFTcT, q jqqrcq^cqqf^, ‘^a^qTiftq qjqisi^q” 
5??^ qiq^ q qg^mr: qi?q4ts^%, qrq%3fqrqrq:, qqr 
qfci qilqq<qq|frg: I q qrq^t^qjqqqjRqicqqr: 
s^ I ^ f| 3^qw ^fqqrq^f^, q»^^qq!ft«icit% ii 
esraif^qt q 'fi^qqrq^^ qqqft^ I tgiim q 

* ( 1 '^)%f^^nqqFT q»r4qi^5^4q^ i| 3$l1c!^q[^qt 

qffiRnRqui^w H ^qrqFT qrqqif^, qrsi^q^ 

ww^cqf^q^qjqg^ I ^tqq*q^3?q f:^q;!rRi \\ 


“aniq ^qq^ q^W” qrjcRqrWiqq:^ f^RWqrq- 

*ctqqfcfTr:-q??Rqw “qpjqq^gq Wiqq^qq /| qr«^” II 

fq®^- sraf q — ** ^ qi4qrq qqqr 

fqrft^%qT^qcqqR^: I q^ 


fqrfr II 


qraq 


\ fi%iP!nq%: I 



^ I [ af. a* 


q?rcwt f^5tf%” ^ [?i?raro«m.^ oj<K} 

m srsn^ sjf^jfr^^TRr: \ 

q^ sRRjqt qifrf^wi: qt S^acqqw^:” =q II 

?^cmaqqf^q??rf — “3%q^t?T:^qr^,, sqtKrsqtFff^^g^^ 

3n3?iif^<l 5:^qgTcr€r- 
xn^wi: 9irwi>Tqirr- qTq[<|^ ^qqRT^?5«r<i 3Tf^rcqarf^- 
nm •' r%rtmt fq^: ^f^afTwqig^, 

f^Rqf^JifHaqqjw:, 3^133^^11%^^: I q ^ qrr^'^qrfit^qnr qs^ 


qrw, aiq^qai ?iq|>Tiq[cT^, § q»r4am^ 

at^Rqrg^l q =q |:w?i^rcqR::, wnqf^ 
^^qjfRtqsiJRqq%qm q^qf%: I I) 

3?^TO^CT-ciair^( 3Tr3??^q>TcT^ T:?qrqqRTqir<i^^: ) f^- 


(i^)“qf|[qfr<rjSr. ( a^3W^ciTq?PT: arejifaKRT ) 

qiq.^ jH^iwqi^Fw: H ^’.qirqqrci^r "Ig:, ^ ^q ^qr^I ^Tf^" 
sjif^^t ^>5[f¥|<TcqR|^ qrqqr ^-.^qqrciqitqTW srift: | a- 
=?q3?qFq?qsRq^sfq sRtai; I a^qr: naarqt^ a^s^qr- 
^qra^li 


fa: 



^ I 


( i«,)^nqrftqqai 
5:«iqqM«ai (Tanrr- 
qiCTtcin^a#Tq u 


sqrK =q 3I5q^ ^ sq^q^KUT:, 

fraa^, sqafRqanr- 
^Ra^l sqaj^Jr^qrqsERTRq acqnaqar 


israa^l ci%sj qra^^arair q<t frq^, araq^^qrfJiqraq |‘ 
335^ aq^ — sqarrClsi^f^^ 


\ I ^ apTRq^^Htfg; i i » «T?Krsi^K% 

'?tpJ#T I «rq«5q% 3T%qq «Kf«ift%qqfqr*iiq q q q»H 3n%fqrr^ir>r>i 



I 


(fit. V] ■ 


VS 


^ 5qq?«TT«T, w^r- 

irmicT I mi «iafqf^ — 

1^4 cix^ppwsnf^ JT ?nff5iciiqfdr^»i^| 

%qc5qccra% ^»]u\tl 


(n'»)5rrerr^^^:- 

nwrlt-iiiRTfffFfw- 

^^^tiT5*T?rCT- 
^R^or II 


wwrw 

^rr^RRwiroT: ^a3^frii«n?rqiq 
ci5c^ nT%5rnfi^— 


^ ,, n si^^rflnfcpr: ^ I 

fkmt[, sr gw.* ii ^ » 


«^-” ^ I it ^TT^^ip? f^r: I qir%^r 

5isf^, qif^^r | 


m mx qfif^cg^q— | q5RtTcft% 
(I <) II qfT%; ii>^rfiqL, gvRSRcTq^ ^iFqrqw, 

m I f ?T ’» q^- 

^ ij55sifir^: I qfr^ggRT^q €r ^ 555 , ^ 

^csfcrhRct, 3Tsiq?qrsRi|fici^| ^ =qRq^qrqTqRi«TOir^ wq:|| 


SRcmi: 5JT: sn^hf^fi^q:, f^5q^^3?cT ^tF 5^— “JTf5:igT: 

C»\) ^ I te- 

^5Tnii qi^ar e?T | ciqr 

f| I iW^I7?Rq 

cis?n5frqTr#=?qroif ^ sf^:, f%fif^«j qger: I «33 
cf^qif^ wiRmTOTrCmt siW ^ScR^rs^R^q It 





[•W. cT. 


yf 


ai«r m ^sicT 


(\») ^iFfh^5nl.ii 


1%) ^55r«^qiqf^[ii^ im: 

*5' w% ssr^Rot firafSCT: — q^j^if?- 


|f^S[«ir«nfc! n% sr I 

*RiP[ Jfrsr2|?5rr^ m~ 

wsf^ *T«n5^ ^ sf qf^- 



^ SllrfcIc5tfJl5rf^cI5 , 


sr ^q: I ^llqi J!iq2T<(tHt 





aw^eRfr II 


3g«iwmr? — ^i;^: 3^t” ijf^ I 
( ^1 ) ai3*nreTW5nL u H ^ H 


c#pw5 niqrf^^ q^f^Rcff: wi^ I ^r ^ 

^ j irqTqqnTT* ^5inTr*q^5^oj?Pc^oj 

« qi|*m swTorarapq cimisejqf^ — 

* TO*i^ff|gf44ra q[ ^ H'lswFirt%«r?qr?^i 
f^Rivmmro rf ^ ^, stW^rfe: swmrr^ il « ii 

‘‘JiqPTfilg*l^» ^cT I m — =q *m^ ?fcT mm «5fq- 
q^ I ^ 55^TOR[ I snitq^ s^- 

^rl^qrctswt Jif^ qi^oismqii«i% I 
d^mP <» q T i^ q OdR/ ^tTai%Tqr 
«K«*r qqi, cicRWif^, JWioifJi^ | ^«ifNq§- 

*R5fcRm%8qOTi5t8^«^rf; n ' 


\ %«i(Prw!n>r3«irr9PT!--q2?i^'*«r2>it atnnrfl% •'— i 




<< ] 




( ) aiir«wwni ^ 

sn«Tf^«in^9i4: 1 f^q55?jroir^scR%?i5«T'rr^qm: n 

f^r 53TcT '3IT5 

(x'^) wm?m- I wr%^wroirf5mraJi^, 
^^*L« 53?Tr^^T«^5®r^q, I 

«n^ 3 f^fTTJT ^5rf?rJiTH«q''#ewr ^ 
sirf^nfcm^, 3RfwKT3^ 11 

gtfqq; 3 qfWI^I 

(^^)WTTOTaw- ^ Wl'JTTf^r, 

SsfqqJRfr, ?R<Tftr- ??TcT ^IT? “^rlnumteqici^” ^ | 

|g[gifRRq=^%3 ^i^qf irtotht 
%g[?qT3^, I qci^qqr^fqcqcT ^fgtjR n 

m 

3iq Sfqqsgcqr^JTTq XI|t ?nW ^iRTcT^ 

i?L^'*ronS?S-' f^qcT^ 55^q%? 

^ — “si^rq%%; srqroii%” ^ I 

r%%; STcftm: li 

gwq'r s^ERtnq^tW qissRqjRre^q 

sqRoqiciT II » II 


Jriqq nqpuftqqJT 
wiw^qq. II 


(\ c ) ^BTft«Frqr3' 


^3^ 5%qrg^ 

'. ( ^^ ) iwr»rr*rf f^- 

$q3?r>ni « fhq%«r, d^q mqgg^qfcT — 

2 



3 n ii 

“3T^W'aRgT% fill | 3^ ^ ^f^- 

^:, qf^g g 55^roT5: 1 ^fJfrin^riTRsrT^q^qq^^ 55^aiT4: || 

(v)«cq?T55^- qrq^=“f^w:”, f^- 

H 5qR:q: 3tf^qqr: 

cF^TSf^^oir: ^fiT?tr^#cT^i fqqqr: | f^qq fqqq't# 

I cT^i?^3iaiqgrq:, ct^^ct ^fq'4: ( si'aiqmq^ 31 ^- 
sqrqr^ irrq*!^ I ^TT^irqqqFiiriir'^qioiT , gt^ciqT- 

sf5rvi% gRr q; eqq^3^q»: tr s«iqgrq | q%f^ grq- 
'qrwq^ I arqcj^qqi'q^^, awq q^cRf^qcR^q^cqj^ 
smr^; (1 

3 %aqq f| sniicfcqi^‘^»i,fr% s^qq^rqVs'qtcRt, 

(^n) fTT^RriTt- I qqff^Ccffq^q sf^r 

qq?q»LH qNTq2|5?r 3!%cTqr: | 3?q^ 

q^ ^qq: | ^ sq f^q^qqf^ cicsifhf^qq?cT- 

«3Tqrqqqr fiqg^rJ^qrPrq qqcftr%-^qqt sqjjif^ I f^fNjr- 
qiq^ s^cHT sf^r scq%qq%cRq:^dtf^ I 

cPn =q qafqj% — 


q ^qqrqr^q 

JTOTqj^^ si'^ qqr ^ qqc^^r^: ii” ^ [qirf^qir. ^ «]. 



^q 5qqf^qf%, #5i«Rqrqqf^q55iqT. 





aWHRSKiRH I 


( 1 seq^r^riq ff^ 
sffimHt 5«fT- gfiT«?W^*!^| Pnr- 

” ^WTTfiilf^ I S^55t»f 

^?JTT3gqrfr?^W qnii?Tr «Tqf% n 

6qrqrerqR«ncftq5qef5^^qRc^ .« nfhf^qqrsqqgTq” 

(^x) 5553 ^ 5 , I 

u ®^fcRn% Ir^fiRi jt ^ 5 :/^- 

c^ <\ 

cfff^r, f^^cRflqrf^ II 

?rf5trR»q*TroTf^% ^qjTqi%%jrTqf^q5i: 

(^v) ^^pm ^ 3^^* sif^q^rT? ^ 

wTiorsHR*r^ti q^qi'cRirar 3?^5r^^cf^q4qr: 5mr 

erq^T^^r si??^ sr^qf^ I qqr’qr^'^, 3i!T’^qiic!;| 
3Pigp|cir?Rg«qf^q?3 q #qq pq qf^ q^jfr sqq^q- 
q^jRtqr I cic[%qr?Rr^q: q^q^qqf^ 

spmrq^rccrsqq^^ i^'r^qic^sqr:, ^qn^qnar^qiiTqqi'q- 

m q?T^qq45qTci 3HqT^ qsqsjR^K I 

u aiqf5^qf^-.“ »» 

%f^ 1 f^^^sqT«mj sqrqqiq^l m^c!gqrClrqarqrfqf^- 
qri'^q “q mrqqf^ sqrqq;, qq qf^ cis:qrqqi>i^| fefq- 
f^s^qq^q f^qqif^qr f^qf^ qcqqgq^gqfq | fqif^sqV^ 
qsqjf^'rqqj ^ q: qcqq^qfq^q;q^ I f^r%qq?0T qrq^qji^l 
%q q f55^VTiRqi?cft% q^ifcfffrqin^ ^3*qqf^ I aarr'q- 
^qtqrqq^ctrfrq^lqiqgqfqi^ q^qrqqrqpq Fs/^ciq^ll 
X 1 



\\ BiftqT5*!Rf^WFqoi9. 1 [^rf. 

SI as5tFg^g%tTFi: s?fiW(TR^ fk^- 

(^OaT 5 ?rR^!lf^%- M*ljHM*<K 5 q [ c iq^>» ^ | ^rmpq# 

(^'»)®ft?fT5fi'iT5W- 5l^*IR 

3JTRwt<%aT»LII 

a5rr^ qi'^'sc^ ^ kq^ciqr 

( X*' ) ar^Rlfilw- | — 

”'-'• “ sT^TfTflf^q^, flr«Ttn 5 t 

e»S?cqzr: >» [ qic^qrqfT-^iWKI j | ^cl^ 

li 

^ I ?:g?^ 95 ^er- 

(\s) ^ ^' 

u ?^®?itjr^ir*Ti^MT qiqcj[, ^^^- 

q^r^cqgqR^IJT^ 1 W 

^ qii;cqgTTiF=qfqxrq^q qfl- 

f^iir^cgr xgqsqiq^ I stcr einr^^ ^sq^H^q^ejojemr- 

sif^qq^l qqf^^qfqqqiigqiqii;| siq f? i^qrf^f^fiJrrqr 
q>^<qqwi5Tftq^ I q?n'^ qn<JicqierifT?q?q i%^r qRqrf^ 

\ 3i3»n^ SL sr«i>r fSRwXfar I ^ ar^i? <Tq«iR*wW:-“ «frt ff*)Tr%»»rf- 

’TOi5ici^-?I''t5^ tmsqciiq: w*?’- ?qrf?r% ?is<^ 3" ^'^«flg»r5?r»i., 

anwsiR^siaor^tg^, riftiwgStJr 'Tt fXX^ f% an^r- 

«r<**nr ^qrdH^^siFfiH, tXr«i*rf^ airair <n Sowsi qwr^Jijqqi”- 

H% II 


95%cW5?TR f^fNcrWw, 
fg 3 %tci II 



?i?ir sft qsiT^ ?T5ii?ft- 

*T ^ ^^^sejoj sifq^ I ff clt^iT- 

or^, H^Usjqcq^fqr^w fq^JejRfJif^qf^q: qeq^rqNtr 
s«^»^KFW , w qfl^cq^qi^^q ^q®e^ qfif: I it sq < 5 ^: 
^rmmmt ?gr?i^gTqf^ ^ftcR^q g^q^ ^tTqrl ^ 

^fRFW ^ grqr^Rq, erlf^qte^clfiol^ I ^T^S^qcS^IORq 
^rqpqf^trq^q ^TRTFqit CgqgqrqT'i??^: | ^ll 
f^pfrq^^cHcq^qirqT f^qqrci; )| 

siir5iqjf55is5?srqoraTR?cT? JTqt3qi5sri^%5gfHT3qrq^V 

(V<,) 5l5^qqT'>r3- 

^»L» . fqfrf^'q^ ^^'4q?Trqqfcqr^gqrq^4- 

qi?qfiT?f 5 qRPr=clt ^ ^qfcT-“ 5 I 

3irfTq=qqfqf^ ®5fqf^?2(T;, qRTw I 3TiFTr m^ir 
qrqq; | mu =qrar ‘ ’ | sf^: qr^f^ 

qrqqi^fiqiill 

cig m: qqnqq^|3?qr^qqq^qTqq5jr^qq ^jqj^j^rqrjjifrf^- 

‘ (-^I ) q?q fqq: I 

Hwniqg: 11 ^toiqrqq«iiqqqfq fii gw ^rqf^ i| 

9?ri^fq?q^ qj^qifr w^qr^^i'-frcigm^qm^Hq:, 

g^^qRrqqiqrq% | 
II cmr 'qiqflifqsqiqi^ ^jfrqsjJt 

?[5iW^R5qq]^5FRWW?q?T 3qr=q q^q;^g i%qf^- 

qi%q qqr” il 

• * 

^iraqfotsngwr: ?nqqf^^f^:^£tqii^t^=qqiifrqrqTqqmTw^ 



[ Bl cl. 





( )anirirwre- ‘fter I 

3Wto\: q^r^; qRq^r^tifsqg^ I 

* 5 ^ ^?irf qifrrarqf^^ I qr^Jf f| q^, 5r g 

( vv ) ann^^- ^ ciq ¥j^g; I ^ “q 

^Tqisiq=#f: II ^sfq ^q?!^ 

3 TfJHqqif^i%q?q qm^qi^gqViTigq^q^qqiq'^qqKqT- 
II ‘ 

cfq qqrorqiqr^qs^q 

fKHmmj?fmT 3 TR«q- ^ ^ v 

5cTq?f: U qf^qif^W*=3qq^ cqj^rFvs^^sqq qqr- 

^sq^WcT II 


ciqr iV^qqr^ cirq^ qi^aqr qqq ^ qmq^ I cPirjmr 

(A) aqJTHfq I ^ ^- 

^SjqRqpqqfq-.ll q[=qq; ^ q 9 iq:, qr S^q^qi^- 

^ I % qq q%: qrqq»:, 

qqr qt^iKt qlfq^q | qgsq^ %q qqq^^d qte^, a^q 


\ anrriH'rCffr'RJtr’PTi— ‘ 5 '^^wrsi^^ 3^5 

if?f I a!«iTi 3 Jnaj^^: «tgr, 

ar^cTc^Rt, cr»-ir f%|=sr ?ii5?r^- 

i^f^^t^-'sr gr ?R[^ ’ ^ I ’S’T^ ^ 3 

ar^tVjfrrg, ^ t#iF ^«m%n ’Tg’?^'J 5 rl&^?iw?rf^qf 4 - 

qiW'iffrntr *nresr, sf^ w sf&sir «*^iqprr cr*^*>ircrfon^5r <T«r,.H^- 
^^■, swr am wra ?f% 

;f ^ %iqf% 5 n »r«?t 4 ^(q^tiwsr’^ sf^ 

f5s^«tfic:tr.! t«r434«f^r3r 

««Tmf"T(^t sirf?q I i^?ier4«H?q% f^ i 





SStwk: I 




SfTrR*, 5Tcl^|[T5I*?*|HM+m | r[^m ‘q^:gT^fOTq?«r- 
I 3 IcT ^fl^qrqf Irfq, q^W€?q?I 5 T 
Ji??^ I ^ ere^qq-qw irq^ | ^sqqq^nqpqqt^ 

d 5rrcq?<T^cTf 5Tr?Fcft | grqT^q^q^q;: ( g %S- 

q^ qtq#, Jloqfq ^qFTW 5mqFcTWI%T, qq SRFIFcR- 

gqqnf ^er q qqrqrqRgqmqq^ il 

'^qqqhf^tf^r q sfqr'qfni^l qqr f^-sftqqlrq^q 5^- 

( vv>,) 3Tq?<i%^- q^qjqwi'cKtq qj^qqqqrqf^?” 

qf^r S5qqf^: U I m StqgqTii^ | ^ 

«35qsqrqqf: q%qiq qrf^q s^qqif^q I qser ssqiqqf i^qiqiftci 
S?qq qiWf% sqrf^f ; | Jfqr q W" 

qiq^^^q f^|q qft^q^qqgqrq^ I q “q '%m qrf^^r 

gfmrq: gfrqrqt qffq'rq q 

I ^ “q 5^qr^q qr ^Tqqq^'^, qq ^q^g'mqrq- 
qrqqq q qf^q?qTq% | qqr f|-qq?q 55^^ q^qfq f^- 
^q, qr? q qrq^rq qrqq e^sRqrflq f^qqt 5j^e=5>q, 

.fii^rf^qqcqrq | “'^qrqp^q ^5^qT%^ sf^ qrf^ 

\ '‘\^9r»ir**Tsn%7fR^»Tr?r7 sR»TRr%«nT«ir ffsr^rq- 

8rr^*<r: 1 «=?# f? ?f^r^(EOTMTCorfTJTr q^- 

^[R! I fi!f3RtPTRHrnwra?f (a; si^ qr^qq, gc^i^ 

fiT%?qR sar^rkg;, qfPR fttlq iffr s?«ra[ 1 

“ ’' OTJTr'R?^ frsirrsrw qqirlgrrar 

qf%5r i5«n^55«r5^rfr5r p5rff^q%tmJTRr>R^ ^ ^wf JTfigrm^^^pr- 
>i?rTR^5fr^di%(T«n >ifrHr^Tl^sr !r 9«Rffi??TPrsTR- 1 q*?r- 
*’ ^r»Tr»«Rrfsr5r, 

“qrflrq:” ^^«r!T:, “ ^rjrrfrf^srqtnr ” gfr>Ttit?f?r%PtcTR *^^qiR i %w sqr , 
.“RThf:” STOlTR^qq: I 

‘‘qqi%%’’ qTw%'»imq%^Rr%^nRiii3n%qqi^H^^ «qq?qq 

flfi(q?r?qn«ii*ir> arqn^f^ w?' i 



^Rr;n%qqcTirr ^ ^ ^ s^iw 

'nf^i^KRT Ji^%qmfJTr?t I «Hrql%- 

'Tr%^w jj^e^ 

^iRrf^Ric^ ^ sq«T>r5i?|cfrf^ gr^q | %fT*rf^ 5?:- 

^ f^^5^?t5rfcrf^'qg^ q 5 erqqiqw^, ?Rq 
ciOTf frqfqji f%%q ^ \ 

<3[^ ‘ nqroiqrf^qqsqq^qqF sf^RNrqT^wfrq%f^qq ' 
9iq%5fRqf^^^f^*NmTqr<i^ I 3^^?fRRrf^ 
*qrqfq^qqT5m% s-tiwqifrqrfq | a^rrrmgqrqTcJiHi ui 
T^ftr% resell 

crqiwr^ sfq q^ra^qq | g r| ^TcTcs^q qftoTrq^tfqrcT 

tN "S. 

(v^)3T*irqwiRqt ^sajoir^j^ garvir^ qra I 
s;a«TTq: u ft'qrftqr trq ^rqr:, ^ f^- 

qi#:.| ^ ^r^^qqi; srrfer Rcq^^Fq^tt 

i^qr qqT5fTiqT^q woiFcTwy-^qq^fci || 

qqr-iqiqf ^rqrsqiq^r^qqq; | 'qrqqjq^ J 

( v<. )?i5*Tq^5- % tr<qr^qi^ 

qr^ sraqfq: U ^taiTT^xqqqqqqfcr U 

qufqltgqq^^ siqRqT^nT4qiqq-‘|r% tti^=5i:,’-5^- 
( ) ^W^q ^ ‘55 qs qg: q^q^T^’ 

qqmtqmrq: h g gg^ qqmrsTT^i!^, 3n'¥^qq^qj^?r 

^trateqm^l qireiqqaqjcqf^^^ cqriw qq | fcgqq^rq “ 
q^JiqioiJi^” H <\ 11 








5t*non^ I 


(M)lWOTnTt«* sqrF q%55qRt^ isrf^- 

^ sf^ SCT^: '^sRiT =mg»it- 

*F?st^«r^ 511 ^ 

S[f^ 53 cqr?P 5 .| ara[ wrror ^ tRfpr cTfrfrssjSF^i: 


RqrwNt Pt«fisq a[^% — 


5 T^lT^ M-Oy* 4 mHWT«I,feraWC 11 ^ M 

*‘€raPIcl” I ‘ 5 ’ I 

fimp*rSt ?8i?3Rrim, ii#fci:-^f^mnif^ti«iw- 

^ I ^gjoj %fTd , ^t^cqf^ 
52^11 

?if?5K I cmr g 

( ^\) m\^ 

fgiT3m5iT?fira[r’nm- m m 3??*ra “ei9ir- 

^f 3 %ciH^II t II 


a^5tT^*«m*imfr u astr eT*n«i^ %fl[R?Tcf ®iT5 — 

• 4 liw^Ha®iyTdTg[. 3 (Tf^¥RT^«*n«nn»^Ki *8 II 'S H 

• ... . , I ■■ . J 


3 


\ c«5^> ffW *n^ • 



K 




[ m. 51. 


"arfci^jcp* I ^^1m f^igsf^*pnV 

(H'\)?rf^n?r:, af- 'dc^cH^ 

fit^ffwnft'^'^jrar- 9?RT^ci2ir, sicq^Fi I 

WsftSHW^SIPT^ri^T^- >_ r___5n„ ^ , 

sqWSTHTl^^iTfHRHr- )KI«nTcr3J3rTajrc1<^<=ld«i R:, W W^- 

f^if^: Hc^??T»n«T:ii ?siJi^^f^^ran5r I ^F^qsrr^ 

S^qcqqf^cqrf^: | q^Si!q5«TRr3 qsTT qPTT^qitiqsn: 

wftfn^qi»T«qq^^5q5i^iigq^ ^ q?q^ I “^eFqTg:*^ 

q^?qef^fg*j,q5qFqTf^ srfq^ciJRT ^ q?qf^ ! ^‘sqw- 

*?RicT^’, q«iT f^rr^sqq^a 51 q^{^ I “«rf*m- 

qr?!.”, qqr q tRqfh | 

“?fRTqrfw 5 Tq”, qqr q tRq^ tl 

^=q’qnft S3Tfiqqiqr55: 
sfq | aum ^^iq^qrqi ^?i- 
q^ li 

q5!5Tfr^Tqrci I ^ q?q^ff%qiqr5:5^r^ qqf^, afl^- 
Sl^rflcI^UqT t ^5Rqq- 

tf wq^q^^oiffar fqfffr%qqT5, q ^qq;^ | 3lfq 

fqntlTqsRq^ff^:n ^ qfjqqcq^q^^qqqTq fqf^f^^ \ 

q “q sTqrqsw^tqrqRcT qfq^fiqqr, q qra^^qtqr- 
Tf^qrqTq^^ 5 tit: 5rrqn'^qiRrq,?fq ti '» 11 

q«Tq?5q?i^q q>I^ SRrqT^qTqjqssqn^^Tq STIf — 

qgq i fq 5 W ^ sr^Sr^q ^q:q ^ il < 11 
“ tisFqiq^” I ^TqRnqf^q 5iHq5:€q’2^''qTq5q®^: 


\ w f&r: S’tqf »Tf^r q^iq qqqi% ?mf s^qq^^q qq sKinci^*^: giqsqffr- 
qfCT *qtq’PT qfi%t?q(f^qiqw9q*qiqt5/pR!Rj sp«ih^i 







II ? “ ^r^crei^q^: | .‘ <t^» ^ 

sr?R q^R5rr% | ^ ^vm “ ^IRpto^- 

f^rg^” ( ^'® ) ^ I fS^TCtTO^f^'^ f| S13T^- 

^RWtiqc^ STf I ^ STAToRR- 

«flftcr ^ cR SIR 2 JR %Tqcff ?mr Sfe-q^gf^rSTfiriTR: II 
3 siRcw^ qcr; sRRr^JiR^^m 3115-“ m 

( W) OTPnfta- UW •nwi.ci^qftgr- 

5TOR*T^>nT>i*rniTf^- ^qqRf^iBq^ | ?tr ^ 3Ki4r f^'^fi%- 
U qqtfit*fr 3n5-“ mifcT^ 

I II <r ii 


qnwiR jtr% I ^ I 

( ^o ) ‘ ^ 

jqj^r qTf^irf?rq^:ii f^qS: qiT^sirci q q?3 


|?T^, 3I?> 5 ‘ 3R^ 3rrq^ » |r^, * m: ^ 3irq^ > ^ p[r: I] 

• m SRR ^ f%«qf^ I §^;^q%'^3[qcR5iq- 


( ^ ^ qfr^oi^q 
qq aqrqTftq^qqrqq*: II SRTqcq«=R^3Rqq«qqiqcqqqqqq^l 


qf^ gsqqqsrgrnRqr^q qii^q §^f^^5rsa[r?TrR^ m 
RR, ^Q^i^ifRrgqq^: ? 

•?Rrsf^^: gssrrqq q ^qi^ I q qr^qis-qw qq^fitqqjcqi^, 
cqqq':fR JTMTtqqiqqT qcf[^4q 5R I ^qf^r q^q^^- 


qq qinqiscq^ «Fq ^qrqf^l q^q^^fifqrgqq^J^ 

qqJ^fiW «RRq^ q ?R^ SRHf^f^: 11 



I [w. a. 


!n^Rf^« 5 r^ sm cimr?^ 
H . . 5ir%3rTJft^— 


’SjRi^ ^re qr y ir v w i ^qf>^ li «*. n 

(s\) *rT?[fe«r 5 ?T- I <^«ir ^ ^rr^^'St- 

f%ng: u ^^qo^rf^qeiJi- 

, a«Tr sf^ 51 qil^oTfqq, 

I 3WTqi=5 *iTttP7^, mq 
cqrcj^, ^qqfrqfcqTs:^^^ ^qn'^5qTqqTrSq»?iTcq^^iqm- 
fqrf^^; II 

( ) ^flq?T. nq^JRSqq^gf^ qi^ q ^Rql 

ORm: u ^ II 


?c 5 T=q^ 
5 wq^ ^vHKjqqqFT 


, ,, l^laiql^RT? I 

(^^'^) 5 qTqIrm^q:l _ -t c 

wot; WTwra'iwRwit ^ ^iW-p^qm^ i 4 waq^ wiw 

qeiLqJJ^^ swqf ^ qjj %qn'^ ?rqq^, qf| q’tos ^flq- 

^ ^ qij ^qq^ I ‘ qs^q 

qqf' ^ ^qr s'qdq qf 5 W«i qq?q q§ e^qqqFsr- 
^q I qqr =q qre^qg^, qra^^qrqqTfqqr 
q?: f qwrcj^ qir^'qsqiqi^f^fJiq qq: qrqfq ^ qq^f^tf^ I 


\ yfflf^(«it)isrrtr«rij:(«Tm)n “3nr=ft^i> ^Pii[ :ror»Nr wW 

q wr ? 3 Tr^ a|fi^?»rqR^ yqf q )cqi^ I fntrfq^ifq ?rzw* 

qajcTTq trf? FTiq. i iM 4 Hrqjf — '* 3 iq*q%q " fiTf, 

Wf«nq^ s»f 'Tn^'T’Tiq 5 r%swf-- ?qir?fgqq«n 31 “^ w'ff HrnfHi?qRq; « 





«r. ^3 




*finyiwtq I ^«d^5ii]%;?qq5rr, q«ir 

^^3 %®fqTW^ ?r»f ®RT 

«pw: I 3T^ia: ^ g ST | ^ ^sR^TSqsqqnr 

■^rcq^HR ^ ?fff^«|g*i; II 


^iRoisqrqnig^ jir^ ^qiacrjmf^irg,” I 

(40 mi^m- ^ "?% ^"T 

^- ( ^ ) « I 

2Rr%?ra^ ^ II 


^i^r sFfr^q: ^?*?r5r si^q^? ?i«ir 'erro- 

^ « 

, , r ^ttfqc^qer ?5qcTi3Tr5-^<^i^¥i5rmr^g»» 

( ) qjTznfT^or- ^ ^ 

q;pJ^«I*Traf^f r- q^ ^ ^IT^SITcT | Jf %cl^, 

’iftr: u C' ji. . . 

STRICT 3Tf^ 

^F^Jf SFICT ^ I W|: ^P9q|?[r:- 


“ 3igT> JTr% ^TcqeflfJr: | 

3FR5FI 51 sqq^fcT; ’» l) 


Fii^-~3ig*^qT'^ cT^ q^r qtrM 5ifi^ | 
^ ^ qjT^k^r^qjFq^ I qrsqq^- 

fltrfew qciEr^g: 9TcT3ii5-“qiTT»?qqiqqOTTg^’> I ^it 
^ ^ ^ ^ qn%: qRFqii^qraqr qi ^ 

^qqi? %^^q^sqq^«ir, 51# %, qiTOfh 51 # 


\ trarirwwi 



I [ m. a* 


5i3(, I «ici: sri^ 

sp^jf ^firfh qr s^- 

# ^ ? w^ps^ ?rT^ ^ 4 \| 3 rp^?c^%^- 

5*1^, “jarRFT.^^TOiir^” II 


(«i^) ?pp<»nc*r^- 
i 5 nr?i.^r 4 ??i«fL^ 5 tl, 

(v)U 


— “5RT5[opfIT^” i 
5f»r4pi (fiiwcR^R?^ I Jffl ^r^orrfe^r 
^OT =^ ^ ^ cTsefjRi 


II 


^i 4 w 5 PiT«irPr — ( \ ) ?! qs^sr- 

(«o)^^qT- ^ TW, 

fiRj^ tTci^cpq sr;if ^ 5 Tqf^^ q«ir mi- 

’UFT I qs^Hr, cpuT^fmf^mq^ I ( ^ ) ^qr^^qi^- 
srpq'r^cPcq cpgqs^: | qqt#=?T^F^?r ^RF^qica^'^q- 
mqtf qqr \ <pgq 3 ^: | cpm^ir- 

I ( ^ ) ?cT«r 5ira?=a^cq cpgqsqr:, ^f^isuf ?wr- 
qr^ I f| g^*Tt ^ q«TT ^ftirW qqi 

f|qqfl?sq^: I q cpqr^rrqf^cRcqfirfh | ( » .) 

qs^cpq^ q f^Rm, 3 ^cqpcreqirqfqfqTt?^| q<i^qwr- 
f^5i^ cTg^cRqrg^cRq Ji^cqr^t^^ 9ii^,q%qjqf^5qpq^qr%- 
qpq % *i??qq»rqf sqqF%f^lr6Rqwf^qf«qiW ^qqi^q p- 
cqqJT^ sqqfh^d sf^: | q ’q qqr cp^ii^fqqRqhi^qjp- 
cqqiiqf^ I cp*n^^cFf«T: qj ^ | qp^clpq¥R^- 
qqp^sftqrfJr 11 


qqq^ ^,?T?ciq qq qf^: qfr,.ii 






. N _>* I 

( V»1 ) «l*m^!TriI- ^ ^ . 

^RTTwnrftwiT* i 

iT^ 1 ^ '5r^ '^jsKfw^ ci=gf§^^- 

fi^^^nffTR ^rf^*?RTf^r f^rra#?!, =^n%- 

3i#cT I ?r g fHcRci^r^q^r^ ^r | 

®ir g?g^?r^r f^^«ir: anf^-cr ^eq^pci 

I ^ jjr- 

^ciiScqr?:: ^TcIT f^vi: | mi^ Hwilqi^R; — 


** TlRr% ^itr JTwtr ^?rcir ecf: ” | ( 

s^tcir. \nx ) 

q«n ^ f^:, g^gfrsr- 

sf^ ^ f^i^: I ^,^5cT==53 

q^ qq ^W ^qq^: R ‘qr^fqjqi^^ sf^ ^R:qiqr?qf^, qqj- 
^qrf^r qrqr4ta?^qrcj;| q%q» qfl^f^qi: qr=qq;: q^qt- 
Ri'^tosqq^q^gq^ ^:Rqi>q^r»Rci5q?cTTqT*p%qr- 
5qq?qTS[^g[ | qqr f^qt qwan^qs^orfimfqiqT 
q g i^f^qqq^^rq, Rrf^qjip:^, qq ci^q: 

51^^ mq^oiq^etfoir «rf^ ftto aqf^^qjqrqr: nrq- 

ft'qf^ I) 

fqr^cIcT:— anWq: qs^q qfT^oisqrqrqr^ 5IT^ 3I?IW 

\ «r?»rPr f? Tr*gs ^T^ fTfr 5qqjf?r:, sir^rm^- 

tW5r?iT I ^ r^aRKf^>nn5iR^*r qw “ ff r%B w " frar a*3^- 

57Stfl& I 







[9t. a. 


frr. ^Rqsqrqi^ I jrfl ^ «f»f^ 

^qsqiqRH^sr^ q^qm: | ^\- 

fqq*tqwnTra«? c •v 

fqqiqi^iq;^ s^q^qisig^: | ciw^- 

^^qswqr^ci^q: flRq^ ^ ft^fr q^: || 

^isrqrg^ei f 1% ^qiro^cq^:? a?^ 

) Tcqft^n I qr? gcfl- %5, i5ci af| | 

^qRrtq?q?qqq!ir pq- ■;; c. ? . 

cl^qr ai^5^?t!^;fq??qqw II 


3tqf%: q^raqqf^ci^q^, arfq 3 qj qqr^ % ciqr sf^ 

('»^ )qw|cq?#r>- * qs ^ ^ “crrq|^ 

qq^rfT-ilcqftVsi l» < ^c-q# » ^ | * q? » 5^, 

* 3?q?i^ » 5r qi^, qlq^Tpqr^ I * ^^qf^ » fsqi*^ ^ 

qi^, 3fqf^^RI%§qq^q I^ltqrq II 

^f^q q^tqf%: ^qawnqqrqf % mm gqqrqr qr, 

X 'fqw I fTtra %%5frtTfKTTg5rM!«T ?fq i 

q«nsiw^tTr!— i x a^5fi««jTsq»i?r«itTf^Crt«n tr^- 

■pSftspT wfsi^ I iTif T^ftJT^^mHarPfstfq ’ef i ^ crtr?q% ?r«n»ri7 

^reopqiqrw 5i4r3prwf*ifH'qfJTr?-‘fif»nff ’ fit i qr?r?qf%* ?fWfoi>j:;T!rg- 
PTtgfi^qr, ^fflMuntonwHfe^r fr >Trtgj^it i 3)T?misf^ 5 ^nT"PW 
t w'^«r sr TJi-icri^trsit i 

“ ^qtTOt “ fT^imtit ” 3?qrw?Ttrq??Fr1 ST^?«r[swt-!ri3?Tsrf*rrai'g?T%i 
fin:»rsiniOTr%?fffw»«Tt sft a»r ?r2?qTf?wNr*r wrojsmqrn^w 
>T5?f5frt5r srt ^re»iaw<Tnrr?q?5?q ssIhV^ ^4 fr?- 

^r«rrm'*nf ^rt 3% ^frg, 8T»®pt?n%fr^ n jri^ fnr- 

"RW^qw qqr fliqitfPT^ fi»qq»qt ^r^ q 3 q>q itqai>ii«i«i<iMifK t5tTq%' 
qfqrjfw w Brir*ft(%fqmq!” fitqttgi 



\o] 






ewrr sf?t 3I«I ^ci^fSr 

«wf^ ®iif^r «Tr<Tr4-^ I <3^4 ^ 

^ “ m 11^=^ qs^or 

qfRoirJfi e^:, ?T|^%qTcqr^, %qrgfqfNcqi^ 

«»«iqr qjRORqr^Tiqig^ il 


(»^) qTf^TO- 
fT^: II 


cRqrs qir4f^ 2'q>55’l^ I) ^ ii 


JT^TJrapqjn^goi qii%qqi^ em- 

cirs5rqi^^f^T5 f4^fi%qqtf»rift 
enq^f- 


( ) Eqwrsq^ 

(I • 


^rceFst 5?i^, firq’fi'cnprs^iTR^ li \o \\ 


(.O^w- “^” ^ ^ 

^wiH,i?i?tt 3 «wq.u qnior?., tT3[^, q?q % |g: ergqftgr- 

^ ^ S^'cl It 


q 3T^Rq?q* u qmcj^H 

“ srsqrf^ ”, ?r4 qf^f^rii jt sqr^rf^ I ^ qtrW- 

( o ) ^ ^ 

q « ( ^ ) si«iT^ 4^^?isqrqqir: n 

”, I ^ ^qm^qr^ ^ 

'TT- " 

*\ qj * a?w?f^-q?qq((9r ^urerrlqy^i^ «5i%w!<wqr(^f ' ii^ 
qq., qqif “ q «r ” filr I 




[ ’BJ. cT. 




(■tf) w^: I ^ qft^q^: 

qT%5 ^ I 

< ) 3?q^qtL« ^ Slf^ fSqr^JIT »(^cTj 

<'^) " II 

“ ?qqir<oTOTteT^| pqrf^qfoirq^^ sf^ ^«i- 

(<^\) ain^RT^q- SSStqraf^q:, 

^ II < ^ ) f^sqjT IfgrK^ II 

“ f^l”, w?i5:q I ^^\ 

( c-tf ) fefc^n^ H ^^l% 3 :aRR I qqR g q qqi?Rq l%- 
('») f*l 2 ^qR ffeiF«iqseq'ii% *nq: n 

“ giqqqg^” ^Rqqrqq^e^qe^Pi | stw si^qqqq 3?q- 

<c^) Hrqqq?q* ^^qqqRrqqqf^ f^q: 

( «=' ) ^qtq ^ qrqci^ I 3iJTr%- 

jhr: ?iqrq: I ^iraqqq^l mT^ ^fq- 

sqrq^i: q^;?qt ^ 3 ®?=%, q.qq^ srq I q 5 stqrqR 
4^q:, qi^RRiq | qn^ q^tqRqqi q^w g^q:, aiqr^- 
qTqTci.ll 

“ q?^Rfq ” I q^^qqjr^ 5?fR qqf^icT^ misq 
(c%) 1^1 sq^'^. q-'qqT '<sm qq't 
(^) 5Tqi%r^f^ f^qf^: I <^q5^qf^f*Rf?r 

RqB^qq^ 1 ^fq RqjT^q 5 {w?qT I %q. qq sris- 

fcTq^sRTq qiT^qqfq ^qii^qqq qR^ sqqrq ii 


\ 3 n!Tl+ q^l 







( «VS ) fm\ 

'ifr?T»i.ii si^ qT%T-d ^1% ll ] q;^tT?{rP^cf- 

irf^qwrsrg^^ct^^JT^ll w 


( C<£) S?lTfn5?TTff- 

^wr»5rwiff3r 

«I?fl|[q-J?fff II 


cT^%if sm^ff oiRTrrsqtfT^tw^Trw I 
efSTfcI cl^: 2WW 

arrf- 


?jnn^^nT%<T»iT!TO=r5i^ i 
5?T%, gr«ir sr^irfni;, crfstr^Jhr^^Tr ^ gJiTH: ii ?? ii 

t 

I =T% goir: 31^ ^3^ I 

( ,£^ ) T%aorcfff g^rCr^rmfcRgoTc^ 'f^rw^r^qr- 

iniqff^Wt!;iT( 1 ) I 


9 

“ 3if^'^ qqr st'qTJf ^ qq^^qr sf^ 

(so )3Tfq>fqK^- ^ cT^c-qqjcqm I m 

Tgiffrqn H ( ^ ) S^rT^qt^TT 1 ?r 1 % 

qqfHH^^qqjr^, sifq ^ I ^ %q??qTg^q?q q;^qf%5^ 
%q^f?F*Tq ^r% ii 

q’ fqn:-‘f^frq^q5qf^qT5qr55i5a[TqTcqq:q , ^ qqR^T s==q- 
( S') ) f^qqcqjT ’ ?(q-<Trq q??r!r-“ i^qq ” ^rT | 

• Hmpqcq q ^q'rq s- < f^r ’ qr^r:, fqiiTqr§:f%f?T^ qrq^j; | 
3^^ \)i^) 3 ^: 

1 T^fTqrqiR^ 3 , 3i^qT^oqTfsfiqRT fr%^- 


\ W'iRTFqfHqrrq.i ^ rq^isRif^r tf«T - 1 



I [ et. «T. 


qrqr , smvsimii ^:| cwt ^ «?^rf^w|5it 

ftK^I Wfr m ^Tl^: il 

*‘ 31%^” I 1^ JWRf5«IT^ 
s%?TJTr:, ^ 3 %cBP3%' 

' ftcq^: II 

“ jRm(^ ” 1 ^ q: ^ s^5rreftfcT sro^P^ I 

g^:«Tf^qqftnn»ri«it 


qL«re5 H( ^) 

^ ^ 33 ^ W^' II 

sqrKfTlJISii^ sf^5n%, 

( ,, _CV- I n , . r Ti i JL 11 . IT I 

Jihmaii SRi^5r: u ^ J ^ 

r^h^: II ^ 

3^5^5Sf- ^ dlqOcii 

5^.” II 

J|viR^lp?p|iif^ 5^5^, ( 5 ^- 
sjrargp^^, cTt^«ig^^ ‘ fifl:q- 
CltT: ^rl ? 3lc! 3?T5-“ ??«TT ‘q 

I S?q4: I q^ra^JTtqn'^ 

^qCrcqfl^cq?^: n ^ n 


it 


cwr 


( ) sq^RTSETfR- 

qt: pqT^^q^q. u 


( %S ) qrq*=^ “q 11 


(^'•) jiiA^qor. 5T^ jnrr:, 

f% q tT^q^^ftreq?! 3TTf~ 

\ ilqrH 'ftor h »ja'^ «?t5%rHrqf5ffqr?[ ??qf*PTfq f^r^r? gr^ j^q- 
2fff% w«Tfr, f% g (Tgqg^wgfq i'%^r4 fqq^rgq^ wssTf^gfti> iT=qrqf 1 
are? qjfr^q^ flsfgmV gqrgq. 1 ^ Iwr fSqpfrwnI i < ftipr?gf- 

sqqr«gq^'^%gMq. I » i 



II 


t i T^r ^w i ^fiiPwn r iJ rt i 

" goir: ” [to«^:] ^ sr;t- 

<?in*iTfFimgTre«tii ?T3C!ir*T?iT^?a^«T ?p=5r3^ ^ sSt^rr^siT 

^^cisq^ il 

liT^-lftfil: gl35^, SjtsqTcqsK: 9lflT^:- 

( ^^.) 3^5^<irer- 3?!ftcqrt*?^ ^^3®T:; 

^ sTt?3Tm^g:?qf^,” 

Jif^ “ 3TR*i ’ I %tT^?Rr*?i«iT: g?§T^:, ^ § «n^;, 
«n?jRi5?^q Miw^cfrgj sro % jftpiimrsi: i 

«3;^iPT^ sqiij^qiT^I iTT^^qcTT | qwnrrqT- 

-. * 

( n*. ) 3«iRf u- «T«ITWI>R [ 

jtsnr^-qqra^g u^r- 55 ^ ^ q^ cm^fT 3?»TT q 

II fjpj^ I Jiq^qcfffh 

qqf^ ct^ li 

5i^qq^qr teqr^-^* 3i^^f^mqT?iq^qjT^qqq^q^ ” 

o ^ c 

(loi)3qrHf%. 5(f^q>qfir^- 

qr:, aT??ft5RITWrqf-3T- | ‘ 3l%=qrf^qq^q: ’ | J^qiiPTcT- 
?^^r-3T7qtHnV ^ c--y_~v^...,_f^-^ , -s- ft n?a 

^»nH-3T%*ifiT2^i- I qqr f? 

ftlFTT: II ^SRcT^rol srfiiqq ^TFcUHTeq^ SII^- 

«?4 w. eT^cR^ft 3?fvi^ ^ 



[m. cl. 


I * 3i?^P7r?TqftnT: » I 

^\^^^^ m\ sfq %qr ^ c!?qT?srq: | ct«tt f^, 

JTff^fHqqrqrte qqjT^r^rqqwf^, i^: sito- 

^tTMflTcq aqcqcR^t, cr^r:. RWiRmfcft srrte wq^ci^^- 

%% I ‘3Fqt^3r^-?Tq:» | s^cWHqsfq | sTfr^t 

^ qr^oTTfr:, ^ =q goTRi I arcT <^q ?! ^- 

'cn^q'|^?:^«^qr^; Jtrq^^Tcqq, 55?jT*irqrcT^| ‘3i'%- 

«I^^JIfcfq: ' 1 3?^''TO5=^r:, arf^mr^l^q qr^gj 
^qsfq I »iqf^ ^iqTqq:- 

«gp^;qf^4qf: | 

%q ^cq^q fijqq ^5i: || „ 
c!q?r^fq I 

Ciq ^qq || 

qqrqif^: ^^siq^qt fqqrnt ^qsswrq” n ^ '^- 

mqqci-^k. II \\\\ 


( ’i<»^)S’Jiqqi*fq:- 
qqt gqq^r- 

q^ II 


“5|qiRTqfl%f^Wqr:” IcqrTjq, Ciq 
% % f cl^fqq aq^ — 


33 sr^rq^ftr^qswq ^ ’sr 1 
5^ ^toTqr^ cw:, srsftqqin^ lf%: II \% II 

ifq I ^ qqjT^iqff^g^T-ei^^qr^: | qq 

(vx)ef^s°i^- 55mqq^ qr?qqte% 

viTq:-^Tq^q , n^q- q^ qqf^, q§eq ®rqq^ qj?q- 

f%%4Tqqq qqr ‘qrqr: \ qq 

qqoqqf ff%q§5q1q55fqqq^, fqftf^ ^xm qqjT- 


^ricqqicqgTq^ li 



^ST^iq^- 

(1.^) .rats^- 

II I ^ J 

?I2[^JI ^srg: 5T|xq5^?q il 

?5I^ ‘^c5cTqr qftcrlfgoq g^oiF SSf»^clT ^ cWeT 

( )jT#r2«ii?T- JT|f%STrcT^^%?r f>R^ S|5r?l^ 

*rT^:“5^ff 5iIT^\qr cfflr T^zfTJT^gtKg- 

^q^risr Ctq: ” ^l% | <^sf^R; JT- 

^5r ^^^, cTt? II 

^g qj?r?:f^ri?5irR5r g^ir: §=^^nT§^qcT^ sq’e^ 
(\o^) ^^qreqff^qrqjf cTT »- 
arqroi^ ^3»iTqriT?fq- ^9 TcT 9if?-“qifrqq^T5^ qf%;” ^ { 
5ini: q?fr%cqq. li q»4T qf%^® Sq^I^Tfqsft, 3l«T 

^qqqir^^^ qjiq f ; mj =q qicTRTr^- 
’sqroT: q^?7^flRtm: 5tT(f^:^?ROTc5^q:iqqiTRqF: ; qq 
^qtT% FTqtfq^5f=q'^qgqf^l'cI ^qqjl^ qiR«jf^ci =^ I “ 3T# ” 
3^qr45T qTq^, q^-ir “q q^-qi% — 

“ ^ %qf%cT^ qjrq% qr^org ” f Per il [qirRqjr^ \] 

^ q^q#fifqq; TOrg^^qr^i 

( 'i«v9 ) qffTcqqn^^q f%ft?Trn% qf5qqp<T I 

^ « *N ^^Vfrr ^. ... =q q^q^qnr^TTsqrr^^TrqqnTRr^Tqicqjj | 
’?iqT iqTqtiJ?^®r 3®i- - rs ^ 

5|-?T^?1V ssqij^qjcq^ II ci?rqr *3^%^ ^qqiqq^^s^^^^Eq^TT ^qr- 


• \ 1C qq I qrr qf«?r qccqr4cr«fqfHq!r%qraRrrrqf fit nr?' i x ci’fq- 
cqftrqi^qfw i 



| [ ^rt. ?r* 

ftsj ; clc^ Sf^ mat g<3«:TO3- 

if^cjj^l %9r. ^ acT^^ ? cTT: Jifh cRqi: 

?:’5r^TOg^^l 3^Gir=cTt cntrf^^tirjf 

mat i%qr Hi^r 

s^irWcTT: I m 

ag^ m: , a*i: | i^^si^jrrst- 

garat g*T'?^aTai%’?«r:, a53:^aTa^|a^a^3?sff:<sr- 

^ ftrs %5°*TfiiTlr II ^ X II 


?qT>cia^3i5^qqr>2 ^f^i^qa^iqf^sr: ^rq^fqf^^fqr- 

<vc) I ^ 3=^* aijqqqqqf^tr- 

t s^ #cTaqt fcRcqqf^^teg^, f^qq?qq%- 

cRcqq qaqqf^q — 


?qrf^«?qq5rfr u 


Icil^cqRW^ wrsq^wfir fe«*^ II la II 

^ I ar^’^teqf^’^-qqr ‘ 

{yos)^^m:- “aaqiq^^ ’ [ qrPnf%^. 
35I5fqn'^tl%?qgiq'- fe’lq^cq^f^ 
aisqqsqr^^^H 3|J^_ 

“^goijTfi ’» ^ \ * l<g5:^q%Rq«R 


\ fTf^dresTHWI? gm5=»!r^fRRC, g»3swinj»r«rm5fr*rf^ f»T^fSr^'?mt 
«f»ini^*rrfqr?i^itrsc— “ 5^ ’’ I ^ Jiqr 5r«!r5!»s^rfr: 
f%lr^ «'?Tarw?iwfor ^57«Tr%— ? *T«Jr 

arf^sc^^fsr^fr, f5^wn% <^rr? fiW Hrw: i 3Tff^^r»i(7 fH^rfsi- 
ssf^^rsf^ I 




\\ 


\ <K ] 

qtfrr s^Trffg ’-?f^ ^tIT: | sufh- 

aflTT^qr^TRig; ” |t% i stf^qqrf^fqqq^i qg- 
•jqr^^rqrq | 3 I«t qr sqxrrrsqw q^'r^rqi'qqnrr^qrq'rrT qq ^q^- 
5 'jqri'^^ qTirsq; i| 

?qf?qg-3isq?frf^r ^rrqf q^qri^f^fqRrqr qqr: I 

( ,c,o ) BicXT^ff^ir- fq^fq ^ f^-'-qf^, qfqTqqfqq- 

i< i%cqri^i«r^q qii^qyirqrqj' 

fqrgj» 1 3 tqqiiTgi^v:i:-q^r 5 1 % qjRoigqrqi^ ??q , qqi 
qqqrrcqtqr^qqi q?!!?: | qqr qif^<n 

qi^^qq eqqir^'qqqg^q^:»qqi?f?qqT ^rT^^qq i qqt “q qfq;n<q 
g?qT:?qqr?Tfqqi qqrqqoqTq i%«q qqfq j| II 


fqf^qq- ‘ sqqrrg^ sqrKgfqqq » ffq qiq^f^i^qwqqqr:, 


( I'J'J ) tqfRij{^ 

fqq;^rroiqf?THi’<’T- 
■ 4 %isr II 


qfqfqqV r? v,?fTq[:, qsq^qjTrtrqw'q gfi;?- 
-^qiRC^eg'q qjrq -qTJTqR'«Pi 1 qiq=^qn%q 
q qq^aTiFiqifjOT *^qr?Icqf^: | q^qT^ 
^qqifq --qq^fq q?.qr?q q(cq%; 


'q^rsqqrif^q 'qr^ — 

vrqrqf qfrqrrwrq; ^^qqrrr^ qf;r=qq: irf %sr i 

^rwqqqfqqq»TTq-Tq»rFTTk»q^'=q'’Fqr ii ii 

“qa[rqrg*’ ^fq j q^rqig I'q^fqiqT qq<rt^rqr qqiqt qi'f- 

• (I'l’O qii’^ q555qiRqq?cq5qTFrg I fq: ? 

3isq»i=5RRqqiqqifq i <‘ eF;r<.oiqj[qfqqrqi?:fqqrq[^^^'^qfq ” | 
qq«RIq^I^rq>^l^qqrqr- . rr r. 

f^qrqi-^qrqsqqjmTs- ^rqiqm mm | qqi q qqi 

Rfq mm ( 1 ) (I ^wfR gqqqr^-irq r%:q'vfqT rqq 3 q% — 





3 T 5 «rTffmg 5 rr^ I 


[ et. t 


* '^cTT^qci^Tf rfjT ’ — ^ 

3?5W'^#cf| tT5 5RKoir^Rqositflfq''¥i5T 

Crf^ (^vrsq'"^ I ^I'SqsqrCif^ sRRqrTt'Hr- 

^rr^TR^qf'a fq^rsq-a, a^qiqroqffr^ifj; qiR<qifi, 

qiRCfTT'qia:' =q H^rf^q^qrsqTffia^ I ^r sq mi- 
’JTTcf q^qrsqxHm ^iTsjia qR'q'^oTif^a^q iq»gRf qiiMRi fq^iq; | 

""s "S. *\. ^ 

sn%?iq a qrrq'^¥ Rqoi[q®¥ m qsqqi?r?:qr ss^Tfil- 

qqf-a I acqiRq^qqqHrqsqtir qn^Rq^fsqTF I ^ A 
sqr^«RcRqrqn«q f^^i^cr; ^qiq^qqr a-qiqpqsqxKqf'a, <^4 a-w- 
3rtoqf:|R Rfl^qriTqi^, «^qq?r|;Rr qfi'aqif^5i=?; ^^h 

'afRqarqf^, q^ra ^qqirw f^q^rq^quf^q^'qTRqfa | 

q m qtqiiq1'qm5qq;qq | «r sqqfqqmj 

sfliar qiaiwq qii^?q [ ^'^rp4qf: | aR?ra 

q.7^at q:m?q qa qq fqqiqrfqqRr^qTqsqTiT qfrqqqi^r li 

'^a^jTsqrKq^cif^qa ” ^a I qiR'q- 

^i%a: q;iq aaaa ifa , 3?^a^ra 

(1V^) W.Km ,- V rv 

m^Arni- ^R'qrq ^iRwi 

E^TKcrqi f^qiartffi ^ q ^iq^qrsqTRcqrc^'qi | a q?qj]^q% 

T^^rqq (S) II r . t. ^ , 

qiraw^qtFaiqr s^q^qi ^iirTjr qaioiaRa | 

sqqqq f| f^qfai*-qRa®iai a^siqia^rarai q^a^qq ^- 

q^cqamaiq^q a f^aiaif^f^ li 

o 

?qT^aa~?tTi^a: qqi%: qifTOf^pqaraiT^aiar "% a^a ^ 

\ I 0 ’N 6 ;':qq'< i ^ qsfin R'qi'fK^r fi^ 

( iffW ) ®i%Ti'^ 1 



( «r^4f^®qcT:, ti?f cl?!: q^fisq- 

if^?l ^I^rcrw ’Ifr- %i%?TcT 311?-“ qRm«JTI?i !» ifcT | qf^- 
ffr?i?^%f?ia?frq^(?)n te^r?T^ 3?sqrteilrfci qiq« ! fqqiscr- 

’5qi%cTr q^^ir^i^crr arsqtT^qir^oiqFcT:, qr^iqcicq^, I 

q2T3[qr f| qftrq?Tr: ^^r^sqrTTqiROTqfr* Sgr: I ^c^qfl^qr 
qrr4>qr5qcTrrqp^r qq^TOrli, q^q^ci; qiRcq a?! qwisq^Kg , 
cTci: q^ci^rsqtKqi^qJTTqi qqToir*iiq??i^ II 

5?T4f ?qqT^r«qir%crr ^i?!:r: ■aTsqTK'qirrqqjTi:-*^ ^iipqqig ” I 
( ) qqjqqr- ^IRR^qcir F|q?qq; | 

%% =qjP ?5 (v) II ^gq^qrn q?cqr3:qr s'^qqgiqif^a^'qr: 
qcfrq-^ I qrf^r ^ q^^qq^cffR aiR ?!?^q*irqr=5qTFrqiR«mw^ 
qqr 9«qfq'^¥eqfq<!r: qtqrq^^rsqrKqiR'qqir 

^ — q>iT«qq??q5q^F H^iJinqi% n ^<^11 


aqsqtK ?!rqf4?qi 3ifq qqr%qqiRqT? — - 

* nr^jf; qjg^ q pir i 

qfwJicr: jji nri « rq f^qici; W ^^11 

“ iqj'q?!: ” ^Pci | qfq^iqrq^qrqf ^r^ f-q^crq^ 

(iii)ii^m%- ^r^^qR^rniRT jqqpq | qRqm^qvriqr 
25r(i:qf,%:a»TqT('i)ii f| 50 ^ qrqft'qq^q ^wqqfq?''^ I cT- 

wr?T ^irq ^Tq^ciqr ^^^qciqr ciq^ciqi^qrfqi qfa^qf- 

•"S. 

q?qrqrqfq*qq^^ I af^^gcRq “ fqg<q?T: ” |rt || 

‘ qf^-?iwi5-“ ^53:qfw” 51 ^ I ^q?T ^q- 







[?rt. 


( I 5Wi?nira- 

^unr !ifmilr?ffqT(^)ii ^ =ff iT®iJr4r?*iRr 

7 si; 

f^, JT ^ ^'cr qf^rfeviiqjT q?- 

r%ft<frqf II 

?qT%f=i?}~q55!Tq^wqi g'»TiJTTq^qiWR?i%Ri?TrT arr^-^qfi:- 

(1ic)a?fi:sj?/f!: | q^qr f| qrfc^- 

qfrorm'ftJTHrHqirrtll jqg^qf^Jfiq^Tyqiq cT^.^fqqFr<Tqr?T[?T 

qrR%!?!qi?^eir^irqsqr^#<:qrq?^q?R?^5q:qr=qfqiq5:qjqjfq5qqF«?- 
eqqr qR'qq'qq?F55q:qiii'qTEq;qrqwf?qqr qqq^qjg- 

tq^g^qrq q'qrJRTirr: qR'qrqq^rg qqcTqf^rr | otf^^grRH- 
“qRmmgqfraqfq^qrq ” i '^qFqorffi^qcrT qf 

f^q»|: II u II 


q <5’^rpqFr ■q'-qxK mpA qr ssfjfii qr sRsqtf^ qr 

(11%) q^mw- SSRRqfJFq'qqRRqpqqiqre^ 

iqqiqqn ii qfqr^ — 


?7EnRrqTT’!hqr?^ fqgiarrfq^q^rqrqfqjgnwrti; i 
wpf vrrqTc%qqqT^ qf%«r ii iss ii 


“Rqraqqqcqm” 

« 

(I’l*) gqieTTJitq 
r.Rfqtf^ sTqq «rq- 
qg 0)11 


I sfe, 3^5^raff^q5qff^Rff^: I 
f q: ? “ FfqRqTr4?qig ” I 3F5qtKqf^q- 
p^iqq: q?rqr:, RqrcT'qiq, ^iq^Rgr- 
WTfrf^q, gFqq:>q%frRqfqqi- ssqkr- 
qq: RqifiT: u 


fqi^qci— 5rqqra*Tiqq; Rqrfir: ^cl5??f|5CTqf q cqiRr- 





SWdtETOWilH I 


( ) WtTHT 

HTierrJfTrmrt s^rw- 
^sjT 

n 


«TH 5 ^lTF(r?Ii^KTFi; | cT^RTtf 

qt *TJTqq:, cq^^fiicqRi^ 

” 11 % I 

arqqniqiq.-sEtgmT-cj^rstflf % cifqn% ^- 


fqmfqig %frrr% mqfToqqjg^^^ ^>?Tfiq?«rr 

?qr?i I ?r ^ ^T^rii^q?' 4 r fcKr, qr?q^rqr?qsig^rg | 

^ ‘ qqrqq^q qi?q?ir^'iqqi% q'^-qcl ’ , qfctcq^q 

qiU^qr^oTPqqrq I cqgqrqiq-^cT: ^qt- 

gqiqi^tjcCqfT^ ^cqqqrf^^ 'qrqqiicfqiqifqqsiqjiqiq^qffq; j 


c!Wrf^qqq‘^rT'^qf S?qf)qqrqcqiH- 5 Mr sfqijorrqqiq^f^cqqfqqq- 
cqqqrqpqtq ^qqrqqqqqqiHrqsri'Rqqq | fqqorfcqf^^r qqj': 
q^clfqq ^qi^r; | cfcJ^^q'-qqifqq (f< oqiq^qriT q^tiqrf^ 
qfq, qr§?o(cqiqq sqrqqniq qjscqn^qifj; | qfRrr^r=qi?i'q ‘Brg- 
oTif^rqqqqrq.’ ?i% q?qr sqsq: q?i ^ =qf?Rrrr 

li 


, q^: 3^qr ^Tfi^^RrcT ’’, iqjoji^qq^rqflHq^q^ 

( ) iqiToirfq- I q^oir- 

'^SRrqFqgiqRt'i'cqir^- rqqtqRTR 7 .z^ , qqf | 

^,'qtf%SR^9 I ^ ^ qiw^qi^R srcrr h , 


^cT^l% 5 ?r%-“ qrfcjqrqR ” | qif^qr^q q^jq 
• ( ) qiqaqr- ^"T^^qR I 

qff^rlr afftqq^ i\) 11 qfqTRRf^q | -qqrqiti^- 

f qfclf =q ^qf^arcqwjq q^a^qi^ | ^ =^ 13 ^ 55 - 





[ m, ei. 


frtqr: qr ^qr ;? 5 ii?Trcqqi^ ?qi?*if 5 f 

qf^pq^qig j'ri^qni^^ Sf ? 3 r?rrfqr «r 55^55^^: ,qfqf^^iqr 
qr, ^ =qf sscRf^ii 

cqi|:-Hr»qr. c^qr f^qr^q: | q =q ?: 5 [qqr 

(IXV) qTqaqrqr. 3^^ ^ ?^q^qi^. 

fffqifq jaqrqi^jqqf (^RtF:, € =qr SSwRt | W^qrqT^ ^- 
5 f^ qj:qqffi ii qiqrq, 5 |^fqrqr(^?? 5 |: | ?:?qcq 

^ l^qiqtqT q»qi?iTcqqiqqr •jiqsqr^qq^mq^ il 

?q«frr?q 3^q Icqr?--'* %q^p^ sTq%?sr’» # I ^r^rqi 

/ . ^ q^'^I'qi f^oq^rqqiqi =q %q^Tcqr%qi- 

( ) ^Tirrorr 

%q 5 qT»f Hfmfq q- f :^qqq 5 Tii^? 5 'q ^ pfqrCrqf q^qqT^ 1 
qiqqq-C-f) II ^ 5;?qi?Trcqqjr: m ^qqfqr^iq- 
fqq 5ifq'ri | q^f^f^qi^q cqqerTrqq^ciqr i^q^: ^qqq»^qiq::j 
q^qq %qi?qiq qi%?fqqiqT q^fqqi =qiflq q^qii^sqfMwj 
gqrqfh II ^^11 


^qqi^qfq qfqqi^, q f% qq^tR»!qqj: rqfqqqr: qfq- 
( qfq^qqqqjfqqqqr- 
<qqN 5 iu% n ' ;?;jffq — 

5 i 5 q^^ci ii ii 

qqq^qf^qT | “ q^^qq^q ” I q.wq? “ srqqq?:* 
^ oiqfwrqi I fqqiiqf^f^IST- 

Bf?il%Rrfff% H»l- f^<<jqiRi^'|R^q^S?|nTqiVq^qifi?: 3- 
^ ^ 5q?qffq€«qqr q 5 2^q?q qR- 





Kl 




qm:, I =^ ^i^^gtiraTfTr qK?nqt 

eerfiT 5rqr^^ I ^Tt sjjflR^oi^^prrjrr maf^fRRr sqqerr i 

Ji(qq?i^ I q^> 

3TrqRr^ , r%woT ^ gt 

^ a?5=54r?:^r, fqf^% eq iqf^Tfr: ^qftfqsqq^r 

I 5 ^rqfct sqq^qr | jt ^ ' q.q»?qifcr 

5^q.Miqr?:rw^q?^Tr ’ |f% Rtkjj^, qrfoi^cTRrfqnq^^- 
HTf^r ^PRRwf^qq^^rrqR'^-rrr | r i% qr^it qqq 5 im qr fci- 
JTflt R?:?iqq^ ^rrcn qr ^(qcirRT n 

^q«r r^r?~“ 3TqJTq?qq^5Sr ’’ | qq|%; 

^ q?r'q=cT:qj^<qqi^q% m Sl'^ 

qqqcqffifrfq r1[ffr- q^'^ ^q^qq^ I qqr ^ aRR^qiq 5iCr^ qq- 
q^ ( ’^ ) H ^qf%^ g qq Rqjtiw^qi qq^s, 

^rqf'jqq JiT^rTif'^T q^q^r^qg | qfqicq 3 qrq ^iq it'd || 
j5qR2[ qq^qf^q^qr^q ’■ | t^qqiTtr 

(')’('• )%»qf^q- ’ ?cq^rq'cK ss^;, 

qqiRfq (i^fqfL(^)» ^gqq qil^R | qqf 3'qr%'^qj3;, q?q 
fqq^qi S^qicqR^ I ^xqfqqirqr: ^l^q|55l:, qqr4#* 

m'>i ^f%?!qiq|5!r:, qqr qq^qr:; ^f^TTRlqi^sr;, dqr fqq- 
.i^qq: I tr sqqrcj?t^ifqfqqqqf s-qqfvfrq^qq ^Tqf^qjf^ q 
qlrgr qirqj: pq: ?qi^, q^qqi^ fqqq^q #11 \< 11 


(nOs^qqqnn iqqqifT^^- 

fitqqr cnq qqfqi? — - 



8 .® cT. 

c T^ng ^rr%rgJi^g S^'nfg i 

^g5g*JTr«rE«^ 3r??gg^^rgsr li ii 

“mniw ” I ‘‘g’ 51 ^ 3 ;: ^T^WpcT^rr'Ji 

(no fT^iTpq?- I ‘N'7qi?r[3:?rrrg’ '^- 

W ?p:?5«raf5irjrff ll <Jqf^q4qTf^9!riT-cT<r#r ; SJcI^cf- 

i^^r^rrir ‘<iFirg^’ i sTfr-crCnF f| er^^^rjnf^ 3 :#r 

T%! 7 f, ^ II 

cT^rrif^^qr^qf l%iTqw: ^ j^jq^qfi^noTf^ iqqi%c 5 rqj^q?icq- 
^ qerqr^ %cTfrcqqq«qqiHcq^ | m 

■<: a^q^q ?ii%cqq, ^c^^rcqfrrpqqqcqq ^ )qr%cqsf|cq cffti^ I 
^ H f|r qr^qfr: ; i^ieax ^ 

i^flierf^qqr irqf^ ; qw q 3 ;^q^ f^qq: ^qr f| 

si^q 9 T(^^r fqqrs^fqqq ?Tn%ot ^^qq:, Q;q qi;i%^fti ?q=qf^ci 
firqq q^qrq ^^q^frfq [^^q: ^Rfr, q =qTqciqr fqqqr qr 5 iqqr 
T^qq ^[^nq^q , ^ 1 % ^q-qrfrfqqqfqr^ qqfq er?-fr | qq 
5 [qi sfq qqfq (I 

^q^qaqr=gRq %q5qq | -qitqiKqq:) ?:5i<qqiqiq: ^iq^qq | 
( )%q-qiT 11 qiR ?qrqT?qq^rcj;qr^q'jqrq W 43 >: 4 - 
qrflf|qcqtRq:grq |i 

qqi^q'jqpqr'-^q^^qq | e^fr ic q^qq a":# 1 % 

(in)VqF:qq, il'qq ^ q^fq i q^qq?.- 
ar^icLcq =q ii Ifqqj^rq fici qT<pqr®q I 

f^'^fqscqr^qqqrHcqrgiqj^fq r%«:q ii || 


^qiX’qq-qqrSiq qiqsqq^^fqqjpq ‘ ^qqr s? qsclf*? • 



^r. i 8 X 


5f^|thTr^^^?q['Tm- 5^5 JTra^'T^j’^cPRqRRi- 

** i^riT 53?cT srr^ — 


^curmf^ %r;i 

gorar^t ^ ?T«ir «^c3?refhr: ll Ro ii 


it 


‘ atUTcl^” |[cl I T^vflf^?^ 3l%tT: i%t, 

qrqr:Tny6?®qiiT*T wr- I ^f^rsnj^^Tf^f- 

f5mq3ftr<r«i ii 


^<Tc^in?i;' ^ f^r, jt 

( n® ) a^nqPT- ‘^qg'T^^Tqqir^qjqiq iq^c-qq^lggq- 
qr: q^n ^fr ii gfinwf — 


jqqw qT^qr^ cWT snqi^nEq i 



; II II 


*‘3^q?q ” I qqrq?^r% qjqf^ q^ | snqrq^q €^ffR- 
( ) «qrq?q 

3qqr^r-*rrq?fq^ li cfflrcrr | era?? iit^q qqiq qlTfir- 

Wxftoi q qtKr s?q qrqqqanT ii 


^ S^jERqrq^ qj^qict-*' %q^qTqqj’ ii% ! ?iqi 

' (n^) %q?qiq 

sqqd HqTHT'i^r ii fqfwqqrq: qiq^sirqqq I a^- 
^isTTOif^f^q^qq^ I a “a srqrqqqft- 


6 


\ JKrR^i?«ii- 'Krai: WS7 <?lra4= i 



[W. cT. 

5if^ n'sfRq^r^^ 1 3TJTT^ra 

^tm giT: e^sqci |r% g^rni^ii. 

5f5 f<T l^cf 3115-“ 

(ivo)^mqq>Tf4- V \ c \ .V 

?rq ^ «Tqw ^ici gqtir ^ 

'• gif qiMcq^: n ^ ^ II 

e»kqqT5 — 

«»^4<iN g 4 r s^^rw^R^orsT qtirqra*: i 

4t¥^q >! c q-^y^: ^fcn^ il Vi il 

“ q#: ” 51 % I q^j;5qqciq | I 

( ivi ) n^4?r- qsjqqionf^, cFHRnf&i ^ 

pTyqif^ mwM: II q^, # sA qt^^i^^qRfq^t q'q: qt^- 

^qi: I cl^qR-pq qr^5iqfr^fi^'q: q^q^pqi^sq: q^ ^T^I^- 
qq^iT^f^ II 

m qiscfci^iqr^rqjT^ 51^3®!^, ^is^^qei'ltucr^^q^a-qr- 

joraj^oi »Tff«»I; II flcnfqci'qrqTg^: qrs^^^T^Fqjjqq, 5155 - 

6T^^qti=^iq^f|fri5[^^qwqi 5T^q^^q^^3”Tr;, ^rsec- 

siRci 5cq4: II II 

3i5qfa 55f%aq^“fir5qCfciq5qwqJ’ (qnr^q;r( 0 ) 

( nvx ) qqqqrqiJj;'^ 

fl^iq: W '' ( qiif^qq \ \ ) ^iqqq | sqtfiqi^ ^qi- 



8^ 


^r. \\ ] I 


( ^TftsRT ^ o ) j 

sqrlff^fiq |{|[ ^^qfcT — 

sTJ^nrernfi' 5i'%:4jif J 

^‘ar^ragiq” I ‘ai'ar^eiqt’ f%:’ 

( ) 5t5?¥®m I sq^ SS^^ »I?siT S^q- 

3TKqq«iq II qif^ficl ^qi^flcq ^^5qJ|cT^^q«T5rtqf^, 

?T?T^ 5|^a% ffir I m % sq ^^qr% f^I%^I%rc!- 

?n'^Ri5Tq5r%cT=«?wr 5 ^: w seqq^n’q:, sqiqpc: ; 

ci^q^r fi%; I ?r ^ ^^^q^l^^iiiJTraqRsricfrqsqq^^cqrg^ll 

cT^q qi5 5!85fqcqr Hiqi^n%qicn*r- 

( iv'f ) ^: m- ^r^r5-“ f^^rir '^^\??ri^q»- 

<!iqg»Rqif^q%q ” ffcT | 

<^4irFi|TT*qi'>ii qiiT5[i«Ti?l58T*f- 

®ni‘i srf^^ Si^^q^g:, 3igTf qtriT^msM- 

f^ifr^ f^r:^^'l5: 1 nqs^qp^cTiwi'^fi^ I i%»it 
TTiTTHrq: II 


cTpr-^Tcmmirr sqf^^fr q^f^qw 

I qjqfqii^TTqf^qj^ 

mqsqfatl^fpwq^- ^Rf^qrf^ fqqqq irqf^% | chtt 
<q;i^:?qT^?r^. qirr. 11 ^ qqf^q^t f^m^qr'^rf^ cT c qf ^ qr^qr- 

qr^: siq# qctqiqefr | qf^qrq% =qT3gtqqi^ ^f^cqjqrqr: 
qqq:, qaf^F^ ‘q ^fqq . iqtqtrqm q^qr5|«T: w- 

qJKrqr sqfH'^cnqqU'q sqra^q;^ I ^^^qjlfrqeq^qqr 



8 8 [ gf. ?T. 

?qif^ sgf^?rf^fqq%, qr gtrrqqrcT^cRr^T 

?n I qrqqqqqrq^ qcT^^4qr^^c-“ ?gT5??i^- 

flrqqfq^TORq ^^rWfT ^l% [ ] | 

tr sq qi%qqf fq^rq 51 ^ n 

wqfq q^ sfqtnf^Tqfqt 1(0 

( 1 ) ’^>g4i%q:- s^qrqr, m: nfq^i^ \ (^)55f^ 

q5lf3Tgf«f;5t%f:qi;rq;« q^q(Mtqr 55 ?^ 

I (^) 5 ^qiq:, q^f 2 ^qi^ 1 ( 8 ) qf^qr q^ 

q^ q^qqf^ I (<<) qrur:, qar sf^^'q =q==SPTq*i[ I 
(^) qrqir«ifq^Hfiiqr^qar, ^iq^q^jm fqqs^fq =q qq^^ I 
(^) qr%cq^, q^qqqrfqqi q^qqfqq^qi^r^l ^%cqq, qqrqcmtr%- 
qirqriiqqi>?f^qt? I (^) q^ qjrqiqqrf^q qr qcqqf^qqr,^ 
qqis^q es^qr qqT% q^ aqq qqrfq qqf^ 1 3?^qT qq«qT«qt 
^jqqr: f^%ci5qqqf^'tq;=3, fq^5qT;qa[rqf:fq«Rq^| 

^ 'qcqri: qrfrqqjT l^qqf: li 

( ) stqqqqi qfeqftcir gi^qqf: | smqfp- 

nq? amM: 11 qT^qqR^qffirqTqi^cqR |3T^: II W II 

9Tf|JIW 55^0Tqr? 

^r^wnrir siq^ i 

q:(Ki«(%iq;i£r qqi^<4ii<qq^^^ II ii 

^rf^iiqq ” r aifirqr^ sif i?:: ’ I qg^ ?q«qr^f%cr-q3 

« ‘ q^q^ qqrq'r f^qqj: ’, ‘ qw qi^qt sqr- 



f^iKT: ^*^3^’, *31^ 55Jrf^’ ^ ^ sfirniJf: # s?ir«rr- 
^OTsqrqRc^IRC^fl^: I < 13 ’T^N f| 

^ II 

c!?q ciwr%r^vr: ?i4: ” | R^r- 

(iv)aTffi^^ ?3:qjn?-“^^r^^4 JTIT:” ?f^:, 
q^443:r: II I s^fTircr^ 

i\\^ II 


?qf^cici^3r5fRr4^^qic^R®Ti^ ^'nr i435- 

^ im arif — 


jor^^^raji snr^ 


rt ^ crnwt, ii II 


“ I sR?r^55mqFqi^^r?:^qr|f^sqn'n: 


(I'M )q^^<5R!iT- 
5'^4?if5- 
5Bn4Tf:-^iffrf^5?q»T- 
oi;, 5Trwi'c|;Rm'>i:il 


qficir^Rrtliq^a I ^^Fq^IjRraRHr- 
=^*iraf irq: I ?F.?JTfg,? ‘^rfruw:’ 

ijfrifTR^TqfcT S5|;K^^Tqr sr 

fqqd^qTf*iqqT«if m qidqjf^’ii 


JT3 qf§[ ?Rq?Tql«nqq ^4 q^4 cI^ 

( ) afwist: «if-“»*rei^” 5l?i I U 

wtar Km: qi4- qqs^q qqf<T I q?if4 

*' q qjrqVci^qr^cT tiqr 5f4 er^crq# Rq- 

qf^4 311^ q RRqqq =q55qqr ^ qgj qi®- 

qt% ^r4 pcT | q?qqfw^f4 qrf4 q^qq^: 
l>5qlRRqsn>Ilf^ vm: qjliwqfqf^ q sq^ II II 



n 




[m. ?T. 


5 ciT^ — 

(1M) ''«Pct. ' ^ I 3wi5t- 

cRf 

f^f =^^:, J[r=?Ti5oifi5^ 5^r^, jpHfqfurfls^ gioi^ , 
r^ ^q^^^f'»T^ c^, nRf^Ri enT I 1^4 

wCi^ri ( ^R5Fr ) II II 

Tsnmiwrarar jt^t:, ^ i 

jiumR nt mf%^ «Tr ^wk4 li ^vs li 

>0 »v^J 

(n^v)R^at3i‘^- ^RTT^^f 

iTT*i?iTc»T*iit?r«i«rw II ^ 5l|%; II 

fT^TwrJT ^qoT 95^11-“ n^r: ” ^ | 

’^^qoT I 

oiq^-?rf^5q^qg: 3 ^- qilfq?^’ 

orgqsf!!*? II ^ JJ 

•qqcftf^ ®[Tqcj, I q3T|: — 

‘ ^n=3i4 g s7R5?r3qf4^^e!ff I , 

cTc^^JiFqf^ilqr^ qj^qr-c? q4tf4oi:» || ^ \\ ■ 

tinr % 3Tf^ UT^rf^cifi^ irqqi^feqqiJT^qTcs^!^- 



^r. S'*- 


| cf?i: q?: 3 ^^ qtfsr^f^qr 

6T sf^ qsqajc^JT I «r sq-5{^55^ 

sqrqr^t ^^w. «qrqTeqTH5ffcftqT«?r 5qqT%?^^iT% II 

?qr^gh-3TgT«iR'q5qrq[#fJr^.q«Tr 

, , ^ scqgrqr^qisqrqRqifJT %f^^q 

/ \ 17^9 5 — 

f^q-cf ^5““ I ?- 

«f rrtqr- “ ” 1 m^qqqqFRr 

* ' qr^qjq ^ ^rq’=^STIcq?s[T^cq5^, qf- 

^ffr^q}?«TTfqi%f c^^F^qeqq^^ , cl^qTg:3fqf^qiqf»F5?«5]fcqq^ 

^ g q3r%rqf^fTfq^ll 


3iq qiq giif^qiT?fT«^qi^qi^^trt%q[<q't?TcT arrf-^' 50 T- 
( i^v. ) qq:?qrf- 

frr^q jqqKoiTqfq- ^s^^qquraqtq^qiilsq^qiiK^^fqiTq- 
^qrcqjT^^r- 11 | 5f^ qoqqi'^'Jim ^ \ 

( 1 qrsi^qr^- ‘ ?gr?cTr«?q:^-qqr qrn- 

TffiBT5mqq.u il (I 


( ‘l’^^ ) q^ir^^qf- q^qqqRRf^rf^qn'^ H^qci ^qcqr ^r- 
f^qiqqq^ u rrm'q^iqR’qrf^'tqf — 



^ Tii«ii.^Mf^^<qnHaq?qgq Tsr qsjrqrqi; ii R<: 11 
|^(P?qT'qi q^qrqq^q^^qi^^qprJl^l “ q'qqr^iq^’c- 
»^cqjT?fKT^ q^qr^” qj^^qioTrq^ I 5Fr»5ciT5qrf^qfii- 
qi^, ^ |f^4=qqq , fiqr-sfqrqt qrtq: mj: II x<r 11 





[ a. 




«THF«r«fi<«i'iiTi; srnirrsrr qsj ii il 

“ I ^[^4 I ?5iqfriqR'4 

( 1 ) aT5<T:^- ^«ir 

W(i , ciw ?^f>r 55 ^- 

^?nvTcorfi%5i?Tg. u ^ s«q^i 4 t s^fKwr- 

f^r^niT: ^qt ff^sqfqR: i| 

^f%^«4 gmRorr^qROTcqrwimT^-*' gqr ” 

(ni)q^qT 3 ^qr I “^r*TFqOTff^: 

irTqF:"^ fi%: ii qrirq:q-^ ” | giRi^r | 

5iqioTr*TT^ qR'JirfiT q^ qrqtt €rq4 fi%:, srigici^cT^fli^ 
=^qTci I ci5( anqt JTramf^rinrqr^r^^;, aw^r: 
qfjrjHqr^i^qFiqT^qra:, ^qr^r ^RiqqgNfT%;, 
5cqTO^n^5]l^q®qf%:, sqn^cqiqi^Rf^ qrqq: i) n 

qf%5 sRinqi^ — 

3 1^5 qFT» <T^ fqf^ST I 
^ cr«ir scq-^l: i:f%j 11 ^0 11 

“gqqcT^’ ^f^, m q’qr — qa[r e-crqRi^qqfR f^^cgwrrcrqr- 
(nx)^#vrqj- 5Trg:q(5iqfq5?qqraqMff4 q^qf% cl^ 

JCflRqutq^^qnfm:!: ?g^FrT55r=qfRT^5qifqqRr'sqqe[qr: gq- 

q^ qr^^qi'cT, ^fS^r c^cFTRf^q^ ^rqq^*^ II 
“qsq^i^” w qwcTiqs^^qrq qfqjqqT^r'qqw, 

i^\\) 5ffJ?5I«l « ^ JTf^f^ciqqr: qj'4bcITfiHg^^f^T^- 



*IFR^cft?Tf^Wa^, 3PTFT^??qe^rtftcT: ?«ir5nrs[fcl || 

q^rs^ cqj^:qj?:ai5fq^ ff%^?qT?-“ Siq^I 

(uv) fr%:”|T% I «RT:OTqq^ 

II qq 3 % 

siFqqr | qqi sg cim sfl s'ftf^ qr^Ri \\\o \\ 


?qi^-'q|oTT 5 (qroTt qr i^qr ^ cirq?iir 5 TTv^t^;,^qt ^?r- 

( 'I ^ H ) *i)f f ^rqf ^f^cqr^^if rg^, aiTWjftqq>cq g 
?r?q# Cm: II g^__ 


^ ^ srf crq f T ?^ 



«t»<oiJ 3 ^ ti \K M 


“ ^ I qjw^r^ %q: I w q^q: jw* 

^[TKiqiqr^qjqi^'qiqiTqTter: 
q^fq?qjj=^q q^:, d^i^ciRFri^wr- 
ll si^§|r^ 5 ntJ?tqf: ^f^- 

*r§ qsqif^qjq, qq qi#^ sf^ qf?^, q qrqqri^qjq I 

qq^^ I cicq ^?^ ^ q^^- 

*q^” ^ il 

# 

^qf^era — qr^qfr^q^qqcqicT qimqfctqqq*q qqcffcT ^fct 


\ >T 5 T«rcffT^rsrf^[«rrw i aT»fr‘^;r»tTqT'>iT ^r i 




• I [ ^\. ?r. 

( n>. ) TOTH- m- 

fS35c6f% I sRrriRt 

“3?5qr4 ^ %^:, 5T %iTf^c^T% ^^01*1^” |I% | 
m: «?HTSTT>T^Tr^^«i: nHdqfcT OTI^, 

1 5[c!i ‘^'9) 

W^f^«T^ \\\\ II 

( ) Hjr«rf%- “JT 

f^5i% — 

^5i:nr a^fi^<m^KmMdft»<f><:» i ^ l 

Tin^ ^ cR?i ^5rar, ^ ^ ii Vi ii 

( ) ^ql^- 5 T^r?^qq 5 rt qj^q^l | 

H^‘qTirq»iq^ h ^ ;q sqrqr^R^t i^r ^Rq»tqi^i% sqnrr- 

?T%?imr?-“ cT^fT'qwomqirJifqfiH ” fr'^ qqrqq^; | ciq qj^rV 
qrfSi qmT^NT^^Pcf, qqi^qi^, ^qsqrqRoi wngq^lPr 
qrq^ I q3^5iKrwJTTr% g snoriK^s^qr >^n:qf^ I 
«qjT5Tqpq II 

qjr^^'qqfrqrf^f^Rqf’qT gqnfqiciqr qjq “tcqci 

( )qOT5qfqT- ^C-“^ “q cT^” ^ I qsrTf cRq q4r- 
cqftq»nTg^u qn^q^q ^qr, aq^r?? qr^ 

qqiRq =q 1 3Ti?T«f sqr'qq I qfffj^qroit q=qqi5iqf^^%eiTf- 
q'?T: qqjqq ^qicqr: ; % q qqrqq f^qrf^sqqqr ^5I-^5qi5l4 


\ qqfsrmfiijtjq: I 



I ^4*?’^?T:fiTO«R^r JTi'nif^wr 

51^ qif^^rt|qr^^fNJH,l q^jrai a ’^ 

q^ f^f^sqciqi wr4qf^ ^ijvjr | qq i^'^qT 
^s3:FT^wwqr qqrqsi sqioir;,'^ ^ q«irq4 ^sqif^sqcrqr 
JiqiRqqf^ il \\ (I 

( '>'31 ) 

sqi?qr^qiq:- q^^f^qqjioT sqi?cRf^wiT qs^rfh- 

qwfJtR^^r^r u 

3Fcr:qr^ ^tjrsrr to \ 

TOSRrarp qrar f^qjRsrmFTOt II II 

“3i^:qR<qg” | 3Rr:wf¥^- 

^ qq » 5 ?ra^r«FcRq. 

f^cTO^:q;^qq \\ 

**3[^’qT ” qrfiqi^oig, ” qFci:TOi?q “f^qqn$q\” | 

(i'»0 f^qqr^tqrfh f^qqef?qn'5iqRi'aiq^'^3 

"nfqt qw?q? u 8[iO>Tqf^ I aq qCif^pqi^- 

'q^q, qj^^qiPq g qTO sqiqrVr || 

qrirFfTiql: TOiqr(qttqT^qTf-“^ri^qqq«^” | q^- 

( 1 vtv ) ^iwi^TT- qriTft^q*l^| q^qrqqjftqqqrqq- 

<5rirql^:-«rW^on- q^rqqRt qqqn q ; ^ qjqf^ q^RqjT®- 

ft™ I “ firaiswsRrt 
®Rqg:« I a^rm-qCiqi^^^rg: ; 





fq'flf«5^n??f^^DiT^f(^«qfh 
^f?qif^*iRT«Tg«Tqr »?qf^ li, 
^tef5iq?T q€r fr stJiiiiaTf^sqq^R^ s{q^f^3- 

H WWT??Rc^9U CT qtfqTqT:, ^ SJII^Ic1IK«iq- 

?Er^:, scR3iT^4|JTr gh^qi^rq?:, 

qciw^Fjwi II \\ II 

( iv*^ ) «ir§»f^- ^q?^TO!Ti ^qq f^V 

U :gqj% — 

5:^‘?3r?rrPir ^ qsj f^^tqrf^ttqf^rf&r i 
qT»W^ ?[is!?f^q?iT ^tqn% g qspqq^nfor ii \h \\ 

“f^P^qrf^i” I “%qT’» ^qrRi- 

0«'9)5^rJWTnif f^rf^^qrqiwT’^ “q^,” “fq^nqitqfl- 

f^qqi: ?^55Q5fqw:H qqn'&i ” f^qi: ?q55T: qi‘?:racq: 

0 \, 

Jm^\: qf^sqif^w., ^i^liqi^ci'qiqrm ^w. 
qWotJi ^lawrqqTqj^ffff I siiqtrqf^ f^^qrfqttqr:, 
cl qq Rqqr ^qt f^^sfqi’qT c^qrTRifq | ci^4^a?rf 
%'^fqi^ ^rq qrs^cFqrqi^qq ^qss^^iqqq sTEq^eflqi 5 
?qc5?R[i'^qq^ I qq'^qt Fq®’|r^qw5if%qqr, 

I aqm^q^sCiqi ^ ^qr^q 

N© 

iqsfq^q SS^qr: n 

i^qqj^f^^q q^“qTiqqi^ qf5^'^qqT”^^55f^qqT, ct|- 


\ cT=qm^ I ’i ‘’3?Tqn%2fqrii?ttq ’ f(% i 



^t^ftqr^jRwf^'TTsjwf^ “q 5 ff^qTi 3 T’»qFqr- 
wqW eurCfJiT q^^s^r^cqqRcqrf^ II \ 8 II 

mm qii^q %qTmm^^r 5 nTR e|gq;qr? — 

^?cT:qfr^ 5 ^: f^qrJT^»TTl[^ WTn^ I 

q^Tiir scrft, 5roi% tmpir ii ii 

*‘gT^:qROTT” n% I v(m\ \ “sr^rM” sr- 

(*!'»«.) qflir^qrf&r §:i?rf^ | ^qq'lci ^rt 

Tofj aT?fT:qfrnFnr sr- fqqq qwr^qr^ 

" s'^qq^f^ cF^i§j&(^?qrm sj^iiSt, ^rc- 

qeft “q ^-qjqi^’qr II \«i ii 

q %qQ5 qi^nqn^qr’jqqs?! qqiq q%:, sifq 3 q s^q^jn- 
qq?ft ?:rf^'qr q ai'q^q q%: qqiqfjFcqr^ — 

nqlqq^^ n q^ ^ q^ fqgiH» TT sorfsr^rqr: 1 
srqjTqq snT’sgf??! 11 il 

“ qq ’» I q-qr 1% qrqi^^: q^qrqTq 

(i<o) 3 T^:^r- f^qq^rq qq«^m, f^qqi^q^^ ^?qf- 
. 5»«qfq 5 ^. aiqi^qq ii ^ ^ qr^^qr®r«q 

gq^q^, qq%r qf^gfr^fq, 3 ?ifR^^qcq 3^ 

.«q^Tqi,-cFf^3TK’5^-“ q^q^r^ qqn^ q|r qq^f^a” ^ || 

qrlf^sfqq^sffra?^ ‘‘qql^^qT:” ?J^rqf 





[?fT. ?r. 




d«T5^t3T5n*rTV JoiRf 
t^wefa- 
afra^gi ii 


7 \a <» 





^iWTqJT^JT ^qsjqiRFTq ftfscff: 


Ji^q:, jpii'^qr; # ^sTJirilXtll 


sRqnjJ!^ sni'^%, ^ a scrftSt ip(^ %3qci 

sitf — 


^ ^ 3!t: srarsTS^'TFcit N ^vs ii 

ifcj I 3w«i?q si^3Tqjcqici^?T?q q?er?TTcew 

ar%^aT?q aw- 

5qar«r=Tff-ai^2W- I w eqfsq^: arw?RT«?- 

4«Tqgfqrtr^u ^inaaaqT sRrafirci? a qmisq^^q^a- 

iqfH 3®TW: I |f^it s^f^ait^a^rqrq^r a|qq m- 


i^qqrq^ 2^qH I §^:’!aT3^Tqt % ara:, ^ ‘a 

fir, gr “a s^qgqqisiqf^ I qqr S5af^=a- 

aa^qqr^oir^a ififijqafr-ar:, a^^qarr- 
qw ^qsqrqr^'sqqar^ a|q?5qTqrt!Hqf%, qqr 

qrqr'sq^rf^lR aqf'sq^p? ^rf^ 

“q^” ^ “aq^a:” “3^q?q” a arqqf^ t( 


a^^q^na'qn'^r ^ 3%; a^M^ 


(i«^ )5q'a4?n- 
qq*fw^aq>tqFq^qr- 
pTffl?qff-air»wr^qr- 
qqT«f?qTg[ u 


^?ia arr? — “qarapqqt^Rt’^ 
i%liq “ ” q^tfcT-q^^qiqi; 

qacftfcr,-qjra “a qfctqRaq I a^ siar- 


a^’faw 



an? — “f 2 if^R%”-' 5 r=iR 

5r 5 5RTf^i?qc^fJrfq^: | si^^rq^: 5^«if ^iw:, 

i] ^vs li 

cFm^nnn^^:, qsj I 

^?rr qrFcrr gjsrsr n ii 
“cpin5cif&[” I ^s^f^cpqrsnf^ I ^ 

(i<s¥) aif^q. ^q^qq^jqr ^ 

aif^ltqrfqqr f^^qpq573cqf%>qmrf-“'^i=qr | 

55)q>«THq-(T|?qraq- 5iTcIFqrq»r^iq55gfl5c5miqWl'9l “q^>» 

[\ a II 

' 9f^c>'^qrfqf%:, toqr^if^^qcT 3!T5-“«^\^?q 

( 1 ) ^ar^rt ^ f^qi:” ?r% | fcT;-‘‘qiFcir ”| 

^ 1^ I'l^frq; I ?RqT^- 

qJiqnf^S exqqqiqcrqr pii:, qqqqiT aqq:, 

%f^55T:iiqrqaqi%u: %mi 8iqqFqm:,^^q:JMqciqr ^ 
fq^ I ^ sqr qwRsqif^qr sq^rqqrqr ‘ fq^qr: ’ 
^ “^^ci I cFqiqrf^ cqFT3:rf^i'q: q^^q^sqr- 

imf^r qrq^'^, ^^qf^qr: ^sfqr %«i% n \<. i) 












^«EHT «rrmf^i^: ^iRj^i%rsn f^Rhrr: i 

ig[jfJiR^<!if ^prar, *n«rfq^^r fsrsr^ il n 
• “ ^HT ” 1“ 1%^ f^^r: ^3:” 

(,^«) “*IfcTT- 

fq|3rT: ’’ I cm *ir^^ ®r*i- 

ftasr^C’T H ^rflc^HTeTr^, |i% 

qj ^RTr: I “ q>T^rf?r | ^ 

^(}w€r iq^q:, qicTifqfi^r fs[#q:, q^r^ciii^ ^cfiq: ; q^r- 
^Rfciif ERIcftqt II 


( ictf ) ^^qiffr- 
cq^qi^qfq: II 


^^■qqrcTr{qa3l^^5^fq^qqr5-“ ^g=qr- 
I fq^qioTt qm 
“ fqq’cq:”, “ qmrf^f qr 

qr qmPcTT qr fq^=^r%% \\\%\\ 


^q^rfr? f^qsi^ — 


- fNq^iTtq ii «» ii 

^ I “'jqTcq^rg^” qqrqqrf^if 

55i?- I “ Tqqci^” aq -qrf^- 

onf^-<i) aiq^^qq- ^ q^m^q^qf^^,-" q^- 

(^)Pl?ljqqil ^ r ^ 

ia[g?qqq=qq ”, *i^?SKqiKiiii^^- 

^ci^mq4^q.Kqf €S?:rq: «^q qrfR?., 5fr=^^t#f<f^s[- 

q^fNcTcqrfli^q: || 


\ [q?qr= I ^ aTRjqi: I 



5itR wnrqcfJi fsi s^quT^ qi^- 

. . . N • ^Cre5t?Tcr ^ I 

oiw f5t^*T?t q gqraqqrTT qr^raqi mn Wf 
5r4 #qT5%-qi?*TTg |% 

?Trq^q's?ar»i « . ^ 7 . ^ *^ . 

qcf:, sfiCrt ^RtnrqcTq iqqr 

fq?q%4 q?mtrwf^8^ 11 

^ q^iq^f^Pra: «9r^:, ^ eaFT5rt)3[?qff^ tT?4r»T:, 
( q*»M- ^ 3 jr 5 -“ wVqqn^^w’* 

I qq^TOiwq^^n^i’T^’qqrW 
qf?T?48^qffu qfM wqr:, ?T^qciT |%:, a^Pqa^ 
JifCRfMcT -cieef^ w^irqqrf^cTq , qqr §^^^q*qqff ^w«i- 
qirs:w c!^qt^qn%cif*Tqfcr I ciwiirr^'^qnqqrf^crfqTcee^ra li 

qqrq^q sf4 

( ) q?ni ^4 f^g?fTcqcI 3 qf-“f« 5 |f^” ^ I 

554 iT^'n^ ‘qRq f^lf-- 

tqf4fh qrq: II » o [\ 


CTt^q^qf^q qi|fRi%qr qjWT^r qqif^ ? ^ ^afq^<t- 
>qrjnqrf^^9jq 3?f5 — 

^^rniqr^wr q'^ir 'sgnrr i 
. ^racftcHT fqfr%^ feir% w ii 

^ I f§5ifqrci;frqqr?r |3^r?qr qq 

; (1SX ) ?LwrTfr- «T^f«»q5T I sr-qq^'qiqrq® q^qr- 
^qjq^q«?qafqSqq,» 

s 



I [-Qf. ef. 

f^'ll^: ” iter, | 31T»T*I«^ *I^fcl— - 

“aci: ec«?^fr: wqRt^Tr^ms 
3 l^gHT^ 3 ^ f^«r^i#, 5 r 55 riTq; | (i?^trRcT ^?l' 7 ^- 3 T«n«r 

| sTTw^R^qiqfgwi- 
?rCR^ ‘ 3 ?q: ’, 3 ft II 8 Ul 


34 ^a^^iffuf^eqqqqr?! q«jr qfr “Ipr =^-cT|- 

^qqr^ — 



** 3 W«q| 5 qiq;” ?fh| 3 ^q[>^fr I^JTr 513x^3^1 

< “ ^fii%q!iT^” ^3 %3 ffi^- 

4 ?rtornq>n:: li ^ q^r^q^j ^ f| qqff^* 

fq^qqq: | f^T^xT^ q%%q 5 ^-c^q m Jw^^aqr “ 
qsjqr^s^ I qm at qfqqii fqqrq 

qTf<r%qrs 5 nci?fqq^ qrqqf^, 3 q-cT^??q®^ii^^qftq?oTr- 
\^'m qH^^r qr q^qf qq^qraq? qqi% II 


<1^»^) qrq???: 3q^^q?^r qf|q3?q 3^15 — 

rqqf®r ^ ^ 

5 ?qiL II “ q^%qqrqrq ” ?rq | =q 

“qwqr<i^qmq^q qR'qmr sqqi^q” ffq || 8^ II 


‘‘fqft^qfqi%qinqfq” ifqwjq^qq fqf^=q^f^i%>if 4 q 5 i^- 
wqr: m^icRTT > 5 ffihrT: 1 


^^’qrafqoi; qrraf^r^ai^ q 5 «eii^p 11 11 

“ 9 Tf 0 f«qirJi?>’ ?fq | “q-jraqii'.” qfqf%qir:,q^q?qqm^qr- 









^ | “ srp^fir: ” 

^ ^ I ^li- 

*‘ cTI^ *ir£IT 3T€Tfef?[^r:, 

cq^r:, m qr^cTBsnjcftJnfqf^oiiq^ I qqw^iriJir^riqR’^- 
qbqfii II 


( ) 5FfrTSt?^- 

qqqf'sfit- 

c?qR«r5Tq. u 


qq^ ?ir(R cT^srf^q:, ci^rq^qr:, ^- 
c5qsg:iltgq^:Trqj^o^?Ifqcqfo^: it4- 

^q^q, cT^ fSfifcT^q qT55?q qr^q^mrar- 
qqqri^qjTifrf^ 11 |) 


('»^<s)Hfq^f^&- 
qroiT 5RT^fqSqr5T^7- 
u 


srqqcfT^ ^^%r%%qiif^ I qjqq^q 

5 i%ftiTRq qjqi^fJif^qjfiicqq air? — 


>qSor <wqHM<-< TT ^q^VT^ qr I 

?rr%q 'errqiit, fqq^q^rf^^ qpqr: ii «« il 


^‘q^oT qqq*j4*ij’ I “qqqqq^:^qcq- 

^^3 I “fT^^ '^'T- 

w^i^arqAw^q- | qf fhqfqqriqel q qiq- 

qwm, ffsT^qriqq- „ vr^ ,sv . 

j:£if^, qgw^qqqsq- fl^qqj^^qira rqqqf^jqiqr e?n 

^jqfq-^cqiqq: « fjaiicqqqT fqqq>?9qrf^»Fa*3^q*^qrq f^rq- 

I qqig: — 

1 o 


“f^q>wf^q4qi Iqq qi5fqM^»j,” # li 
. “f^cr^qrcTj’ q=qj” il 


\ jjrTsw qf3f'fr^«i.i 



[ cT. 


( ^oo ) f ?^y?- ojfj^ I ci^ nfcTT^rc^fRlIr Uff^'n- 

^ ^ , CN_5v ^ rs, ■ 

^:, m 3 W W 55 - 

qfJT sig«q% I 

“ ^TcWf^ fcrg^qxfi^^jRr: ” || 

“ ^ 5 r I 

t| 

Itsr ^51 f^qcTSqU: | 

^ m II 

fq ajTf^q;: | q>r^- 

qfciqjir q’=q|[ |I% || »» || 


^‘Iwg^ Kff^csq:” ^- 3 ^qc!^qR??q In^wsng^ 

(^01) Vinn^ Rff^^sq:, 
a^fiRsq: tl 511 %, 

«q: I q»r 55 i%^ ^ II 


\ ‘^h'fpw! ’-^ >im% 35'n'^ra^ i ‘ »TiR>ni%«Kr.'-^ 2 ^%- 

qiftHnlr^’l 1 ^ fpJrsprJT^rnrr^ X^iTR?Hrf> ^ 1 ar’TJURJirtWj 
2iT»|wft! II iR>rrji«*rf^^ %«tr[ »5j> J 3T'jr?«rf «r *i?RftFR?i'»T- 

tftqff I » m Hfiawq I 







^rsfer^irra” | 
*?j3r«Rr ^%iT ^i^c^rcT^^r- 

w ?:?^3cTr II 

“^^kf^rcT ”, I 

I[?q4: II II 

eHT^i5*nHP«?t 35 ^ |w>- 
sngiFai^?!^^i*n€W5 — 

APT ur<rq^<ff f^^r^^jrnrfgrgffeftri^inRrt 1 

?R?r ^ il ll 

^ I hcTr'^ s^i% 3 r%:, ?wq I ci3r 

(VvjftqrW- “«'rf’'!”=»5R«lflf«II,«Isft.3(%>?«:, 
wr«*i ’» 3<^4 

I “ ^^fliorss^ 

m wqt»T ktjt- 

^ nrji^q^ II 
^ qwg;” ^ I 
( ^0^ ) fi^ aiT- «F«ir%ti?f?iJ’ I g^Ri 

5^1%^, % ^ *p?*Rwf^fWfTcRr I 

akt goir4i 5^r^f sfiR^: i* 

•ciRR[Rr ^^r: q^kfh H H 


(^«»^) asrer^F* 
mg; ««ic: u 


(^•X) 

=Egwf»iqT?T:, ai^W- 



[ ?T. 


^2gr yR g rtrgr f^ g ^ ac o il^ ^r^ I 

3rsrto/^r%r gfasfe^sir ssvir f^rf^: it «vs n 

|fh I 9?^?rrs%?cir<rJT|^rfiTf^'^^r q^rr^ ci^- 
( ) f^'rfqr^- ^?qfr%cTTte^ciift^g|[qir: f^q- 

fqq^q5P7qRTq«#Tcnfrqt 
f^^qfqmqcqi^ I q^r-q^f^qr f^q^qiqqrq^ q?§, stPw- 
ciR:q^cic?qqrqf: I 3?^ qq q^q'lPq^qr? 

qqqrq qr^qoq: ii li 


(:i*v*) fqq?fqr^*Tt 
q^^qqFtiWf^q- 
Hff'-qq aqq fqqjfq- 
m 5iqfe: u 


q^rqf fqq4qq^qrqqis^t%- 

qr^ — 


mPr# sg r q - qp qr, tnrr ¥iqrq?>5icrTfirer; ii a«; ii 


^ \ sf^?TTqi \ sig^qsq- 


(^»<s) arf^qr?- 

q^q^qref^jqq. H grg^f^qqcqrxi^qTgf^qfqjl^ II 
« ^ ” 5^, giqrtqgf^ | ^ u^- 


( )aTfw?n^- f^^jq^qrqi^iqfT?qffqqT^r sf&iqrf^- 
qMq^fqqfqq« iirTJqf^q;qfqq^%, %qqf|q?iT 

sgN^^^qqr-qr^gf^: 11 


q^qtf :” ^ \ q^ ^qif^aqr ^I- 

fqqf^'^3 sqqi^^rqt^:, < 

q^^q qqf^qgqq ii ^ =q cg?[if¥qf^qq?qT^^Tm: II 





“cirf^T#” ^ “sgT^m” I wifiqr: 

55wjrei?5rT%^*T^u | % ^ 

5is?r?:q ^f^-rcrr: ?q^- 

^rqqtqr >qq^cf(T% ‘ rf^qr^igqiqgi^fi- 

cn1q% Iq^cTiiq# sgr^tac^r^c^^i^ il 
“ cTm *Tq?q=^q^rfq^: ” | 3rfiif^q?^t I cI^^jtt- 

(^<i^)3TrqrwT- I 

^qfqqqq^qtziq^ifqq- 

" ^^TJn:-‘ wqi^^qwf^qi- 

^qr swrqjqgTn^fHqtq^f^'^fT ’ fm-f^>=qrcT I cti^ *Tqqf^- 

fqq^r S'qcTH'q# sgT?:5if^qqcqr^^5i^ II 


( ) f^^'qrqr- 
j^fq^qRigflw 5r- 

qr%: 11 


^ sq qwT^qr f^q^qr f^q4^ sqistrc- 

^^rgiqfgRf^ II 8^ II 


. (^i^f)3T2rmq%- ■ ci^ q^qqqq^^wqfqr sgn^^ra^- 

qiiTCqq5lfTfiqiqqil.ll 

51 qv:rr 5%f%q4«rr^sf^:sfi^ ii 8\ il 


( ) qiir?^- 
• f^?qqqq5qq;if5ii%qT- 
5jri%: n 


“ 5Ttt 

qr^q^lgt^q, ^ 5q^%?»rq:oTT4q ] | 


qtfq'4 f licTT s”qiq 3 i^t st'^^ctt crqr j 
qq^cfr ^r^qq^^q ^stF^qw^crr: Ii 



[ cr. 


?^rqft *rqf^ | cw %qiR:?if3q;cqi^q»i3[^wr f^- 

( ^ )5«: «i^- ^ I 3%: ^q^q^q^rr 

q^rffR: sHf^tfqqi « j |f^;? «f^ 4 - 

qF^%%^5Tf3j ” JTq^f^ <if|q4qRc!f^^qqr5rq^r ^rqi^, 
qq %?% sgrf^fcT crrs^^qi^ci^^'qfsftt ^rq^fh II II 

fsiq^rii^ qTOTqfir— 

3Tr«nfrfl^iarcr^s JT^^pnrrsTqjrsr^Tn^nw: 1 

3^ sf^crr: ii \o \\ 

“ atr'sqiTlqqiT:” im I »ri«qnTqq5r: — ‘ q^fhsqfhftTfr siRqr 
( sf^cf > qfc^q^T, s^q ?5fqoT*Hqi- 
v^qifcqqfjf^qpl^rq, it fq^mRqjr^iq cqe^q^^I^tt qt q 

qqcT% q?qT«qifcq 2 Rr^q^ 32 qrqqf^, qsr^sqfqftTKqrcqiqqfq- 
^3? qwrqRggqfcTwr^rfc'qif^qjr: | qiT^qr^??q air^-^qfitqqr- 
^rqqii«qi»qr< 5 qr: ”, q^^rrf^rw qrqi qr^qqrtKf: || 

erq q^?Tr»5qr grs^qr qj^qNfq^^, — * r^qqfqr^rfqjr^r 1 % 

* flflrf^qf^r^?:?ci^ stsfh>q qf^^ifq ^- 

( ) q?«iT- ?c^^^>:qTqq, rRqr^q^qr^qe^’,- 

lcq?R3IS2 sqqr q?F- . ^ ' 

sqrw q^q: II ^q^q^^sq^q gf^: r^m, qi^t qf- 

cqnsqi 3lJq || 



Vo ] I 

^rr J7fT^qr^Tn[^r% , 

( ^^« ) . ^[?f?Jir cRiraFT ’! 7 cqi%W^; 

^^Tnrr^rr ii ^^3qJ^^^tT gr W3, ciWct i q g t jqw - 

’7i^«ir:, f!cp% «w»=qr^5ii3^g^’-ffci ^\ ^g: 

^qr^iinsqr ‘€^ 559 ^’ 3 ^% II 

qr 5,-‘ srqsqr ^rq ^ ^ qucsqftqrqfq^ 

, . . f^qr^qf^, aisiranaqr ciq»-|f^ 

?5reqr aitq: U ^3^ 9Tg: m qJT^TW * 3im ’ 

II 

qr 3,-‘qsi^4q;T^Rr':fTR:rqrf^q5wra:,3Trq § iniqr- 
( ) ^5«ff qr- I 3TfT qq q^rcSHrqfqr^rfhqr^rf'q qr^- 
»qi«qr ffg: U f^qq^qif^qf^ci 3%rf% qqft, 

ciw^qq^q ^q?5=qq’-^«T ^q^ltqT afg: er qRqiW'qfg:' 
3'qq II 

qrirr qriir: ” ggqi “^iq^qr^t, qw” | qr: 

qiw^igqjqqq n qrq^ Wq ggq^crr qr^n:, arrcqirr- 
qrqf^ ^qqicqTqqfqfitq 5r^fi:i% | qr«j W=(r»^ qgq |fq 
qui^feqq^rlurqioqf^ q^, cicq^rrL,ggq: q%rh | aqr:®?^ 
s^^cqqstqr q^jq^i^, f%qqr?q?^ f^qqrq^q: | i%Tqi: ^»qr: 
$i5^r?[q: q^, ^q^qr’^n'^ q^ II 

ciqr f?-3i^5R^^qqtqf|qi^q?:^q?5q'qrq: q^q^qr 

• 

' \ sTf?<Tr f^f-sTf I ^ 'TfmHf’rrrsl^^irr ?r?*if *nF^: m sr(% 

H^rw3r!r?!r f^^rcqrfff • ^ ‘ ’ f qr ?!T'frc*r. i 

i) 



\ [ cf. 


( I cmr fl-lRTa^r Wvifnqpn:, 
H*?w, « I, 

w^aif: m: n 

<!;^n^s«i^^'rqrqr; 5:^51 f^qqrq^ «n gig: %qr 
I) 

cf«iT cTSf- 

(x^^)f 5 <ftqT,g- qr 

gik: ^ir fl^fiqr ‘gqi^q^’ 3^ 11 

tm q^^TT ssqr^qrfllclfqq qsqqiq atflf^q- 

(^X^)a«ftqr,'Tr- *qrqq^ iqqqiq?^ qr gl%: gtftqr 

*• * wqRq;,’ 11 


5is^fB[qtqT’pqr^rr?i^qqq% qjmTij^^i^qqTin^ q#Fr 

(^^'»)q3qT,«T3- qrqltqq qrqq^ f^qqtqi^ 

nqr«i: a ^ * STf^qr^q ’ II 

f^qqtq^tq: qfqq^T^ flei^q^^qi- 
(^^<)qqq% 3 TT- ^ 3 ■^q^q^^ ^ 9 %: ‘gw*q’ 

q^*q- '• II 

qqqi^qn'^qjtr'irsifclgfq: qTITrfJl^J q^ff^: *qq gg^ 
SfqqcTT:’ || <^o || 


( )f^f^*t?q>- 
*rn II 


qiqq^jqq^: 


\ <Tifr«Tfft«i-^rt! I 



swnisf jt^af^^rrar^j ^f^snRr: i 
^ ^ toNt sir, f^: ^ s^5r%^;. n «,? ir 

. vd 

“3f5" I I%|5^*ir5rFT llrc^^qiciiw 5tft*lT 
(^\o)fitf^%«- %e[«T;, <T^q?Tqr 

*^" '* ’T^ %gcqr, cff 3lf^ 

wi?[f^eir: I ci^rRH s«qq^55?roir | 

|g»M I jramre^ Igl^Jicq: ii 

( > sTORsi??- R wig?S5i^qw- 

«n w«l*TT fi^:, erncHU jprfqj || 

515^:; *5fs?:: ^ ^ q?^ ^srtop^TJTgqos^qfcT, 

(^^^)5t5?^<nfl[- qfT^crrq’qr^r^ | w fl:?ftqr r%i^: 

gai^JLM a[qwi*i^|| 

” CT^: I 

^^qglq^rqj^5t^q^q?«?iq5i?L I 
#rr «TTcmfTL« cTf3:5WT?riiqr=q^^ strirfiTfr: | gr 

' ftjf^iwr<cni9^>f ii 

“wfciSiTf^:” 1 5^11^ ^5R«iCr%?iq«rq q qqrqp- 

(^\*) sfcuTi^- %«qeq5T=qif^i*Rg5^qi^^ I p^ 

w ^3*?f-5F5Ri»: u ?iqr5[q5rqT rt%; 

pcsnf^: m T%f^^94f II 

^ g^rq ” *q [f^FcI^9<t 


' \ ‘‘*r5isT*(. •iw^ms^e'ww, fw ftnl^ jishhic 

<iia*«ft^ I 





[ m. cr. 


K< 


] i?wrg[Tar^JT«72[53cq%: I 

g^ ] I ‘ ^qgq: ’ 

w ^qr^JT^^fqqqr^RT qR^r^oi f^'lqwi^rTFi 
?q^qqi| sqFTrqJTg^l €r ^ ^ f^?n 
cTr^qr^qftqTOqm^ ( iqqqRWcqr: ) ti’* srq 

^iijCtcf: I %q»q^ II 


( ^^«, ) |:^Rrqr- 
n?rq^«ir^^r gwr:- 


lll5q: R^gi^qt^- 
JTT^T, fll^q: II 


^ 5qr=q#-rq#rq^?iFf^r qrT*n^qi*:qr^iq^rTi^q?q wh 

iW's) >hoi%- I qPT 

ii^r?^r»t ^qr3q«7Crqqrqr»q tTrqf r^gfq^a 

Eqwqrsra II ^s^qrei^JRTlfilTqTcT^I q?q 

uRgfqq^ ?rr 

s’-TOfgw f^I^^^qqqq I g^cmraf^ih q^i^qiRTc7=tq 
grcq fiqqcqg^ l[iq55?J'qr f^f|[^fwq frqi%: I 

fr^ nrq^gq^fq | s^q -q ^^. 

o sa 

qrFfq ^^f^qiqq^cis^ ficl^qi^qii^qqq q: I%?Ciqiqrq5qT- 
Wgl^Tqrfin^ || 


T%T^%>Tq^qrw%f [%qq«lH^^r ??Fq: I 3iq Jlcqq- 


( ) Hcqqqif 

TWqrai'^g^’Tt ftl- 
. t?i5ia*L. mi 

35 « 


g%«irq i qmqRoi^- 
qq^ f^qw5ii%gs% |qr ?cqri-“f^|[: 
qqf S5if f^f^: ” 51*^ I ‘ g4 » I f^- 


r “ ^c'JT^w ” fi^ <n^»ficq I ^ «T»*n)5rs[7 1 



^^TRff^gCr: I m: r^Rffcsnci^l 

3i?t: f^4qRi%5^r |qr ^q4? ii <\ ^ || 


^qi^-S^qi^qftirr a sitqq0% 

(^^^) sqqgqf- f^«q?frm fcT^^iq^rfqfqcr 

q^jq^rST H gir^ 


5T f^ ^firl^, JT i 

ii «iR ii 


“q fqqr” |f^ ! |m cpqiqengq^^qf^, 

( ^v* ) 3*T.qarq- ^ OTfTqq I qcTitF'irqfh-a^q^T- 
gq'Fq^q>iqa?5i'r»iti ,f^q q^qr4??iqqfq q qcqqe^T^- 

■o 

T%qT ^rqf^, qq q?qq?T^?q ?q^q g^qr^^erTO^ q q^iq^r- 
Jlk\ 5?gqqm ^Iifqfl%: I S^qi^f ^ 
vnirrqqq ?iRt^i:q3jf'Hl'q ^wrqqtfgqq^r^q^Fqej^: | ^q qq 
wnr Htq?nqqrq'rr^qi°q'q'-qf^*qj^^ ^pq^'q q q»qq^ I q 
^ qi^ q'qqf^ I q qiqq%[^^qs- 

Fjqipqqqqqjf f^qr, ^q*- II 


( o^v<i ) mr?«r- 
Hif aT^;qFSq^q<T- 
ftfur: FF 

t * 


siqri'^cqTi ^3Tr|^q7fi4r^i«q^qqr- 
q?^, qf^qiqrqi'^ qi=^qq5?qtcq5fvTrqf^- 
q>qfi^q5ii5rqf®f^?fqr^q’iqqq%rq ql- 

qq^q*Lii qq 11 * 


ivt\) 
iirq: FI 


i%»ttk: q™^i; | qqrf^if fqqq^- 



^»o 




[ m. fi. 


*Tig«nlM»f%vr:, 11 H 

|?THI^r “|q:” ^rn: II 

( ) ( ^ )’h^- “%4 i^rs^ *i^rcT, ” T^ijirT- 

»^H:q^r II %eCl^q?«IlW: || 

“ ”^fci, 5[T§mcsrmrfeR3iif1i^rfw^r, g^rr- 

(?y'a)(^) JTljq ‘^3’5q'R ^Ojisqf^^ciTg^l “ lEfJfT- 

II ,» U »> I qjr^- 

5r^ ^^5[r II II 

( ^vs ) 4yf?rqf«if 4r(^2R^^ g^i6T ^c!%^4f^5R^- 

y gis r i 

ir«^ q:5i>i%iT<«i|j 5i®rr^^5nspn?yei: n ii 

“ '3»«^ ^I^I%?I155: ” ^fcT I l’ 

Bwrr^iSr ^:JTqT- qiFcT:,^sqfqrfqq?qraqiq|®:|5j«tq»f5 

w:5WHr. H 

’qqi€wf5sr5mcqi|:^q|55fqi5i i aif^m %fgf^fcT ?{r%qRr 

”, U «i8 ||^ 





?nr 4 T <w^ qrg ^ 5:’iTOmT>% %<r: 3^: 1 



II \\n 


“ri5i” I ‘?P(’ I q?ri^ f^r %'^5rR^5qr- 

JT^rPR: SlPig^,: <Wr Sf^ SRT^IWfci I 

^ WT5rr^-‘ JTT H ‘ 

5f^ I 5 ^ II 


JirfcTT f^goir:, cic?i«wct 

(v^) mwp- w?-“35^” ?ft| 

^!T5:«i^f25w a? 5ft f®|: |r% 3^'?:, 


fa: 3af%f?i»#'? ^^aia 3?Tf-“ /^s^p^qr- 

r%Rq%: ”-3^r|^q?ffw5^qqfaTcil?q- 
( ) s^'TH^ «qq^ q^jq: | 3^^Tqr 5:gqmfqqf5rtT# 

Ji^iaiqeWH 

f^fct II II 


( ) ®%?Kiric- 


^Tir^q qfR<q^j?f^q^ft?rq5%f^- 


TO§ w^i II II 

“ l$|q ” 1 3fR>=qa “ eiRwq:” ?iJ^: nf?^ 


II 


a aimR'q: 

3R?(qif^ iraFciT^n^ Stq^cmi^qT vm\ 


\ anllf^f^f^nr ‘irif 1 


'»X [?fr. ct. 

sr s^qreriT;, I 

qr?:fqir%ra?^W¥r^r?i^| ^ % f^5qrqr??cT^r qi?qT?[.f^r^5r% ti 

JTj cT^qr f^cqrqr: Jiqf^s^rqr a^^qwrrf^^’^ 

i\'\\) Otcquf- , ?r qir^^^cq^ 3?Tf-“sTf^- 

flHrsiqcq^wfsrqiJ?* ^ ^ - --x 

=q q«W5tfT-ar«r- qqf?:qqrrq qrqf xrixr: arr^^fie^tr 

f^q^fl,-^q R^^Rj^^^qrJT^qT^qg^fsilTrr 

5iiT^^ q^qwit=qqf^ stq^%-c!{^^qi5-‘ ^'4 ^q, ^ 

?qT4 q«Tr ci«Tr q?r4 sik'h |??4: h li 

^qr4 q5cr4 qr %cTq: siqqa | ^ =q 
3T%aqqqr- 5i?">.^ri^5fcTr | 

^ ^qfT^qJTf 3?fq JI^Riqi4gT§q|f?cT, 
■^qf JTfif^^^qrq57ffqrcT i q^u^er eqHec^Ji^a^f^Hrcir, b 
»-| cqcI 3TI? 

.gT t<3iq fr <fqf^^* sr^f%^:?r^q- 1 

5wf4ifr^ri%T%qf ?nTr sr^[f%: snqR^fq ii ^vs ii 

“ qcgf^f f^fJrfJiqq ” ^fcT I ?S[lT4c!JTqfir St^f^iqfSiqcfiir- 

( ) qcqfffR:* ^ Mq 

^^m?t^qti^qt: h- | sfq q^qi^rgoirq 

“ • nqf^q II 

51 'q-‘Mtw^qi^^u%rqfqq5qq^q m«qcqr5reT«q5qf4- 
>(^rri'^r%- “qR’-l!^, eFSiq^q^qq: a^: ?qr4- 

qqqrqqlt- fiqr: u qiy^qij^qj sqr^cqrg^ I srqcgqtsjrq- 



sqr^^JRT: |5I|RRW^^f^9c!FI ^W- 
siJTg^gsTcT: | JnftJ ^ 

qff^:, 5ir^ ^r^qrJTFf^rf^q^rfl'tf^qqTgRq^t qj^q 

si5r^3T qn^'^qq;^? ^riffrr^qir® sq^qq 

prrtRcT^cT^rsrqcqJ^qq j-qfT^'^tq ^1%: €g?Tr “q qji^- 
I 3Tfq q qi^qqr §r%q sf^ 

f^f%5rrq^| ‘ qj^qf^^qrlf^’q^’ ^ qg^i:cfq?q ^qq: q«qf- 
fS|gr%q, qacqfqHrqqrqr^qr%qjRqif^r qf^q: qqxqqqq^^q?!^ 
qjr^^i^'^qf^qqrjcTqr f:^5cq%^f^r gqj^cqicr^H 

si®^?cq%cTqrqr: ^qrqf^qt^ q qr qfiq®«Fa^5iq!fJ?^ 

( ) ^Wpn^ ^TrK^aqf rqqR: I qraofqrq^ qqr«T- 

qff'Trqrq: ii qrqqq^'^ I q?qTci^^^q^“qcgf^q^fir- 

i>qq” ii «i's ii 

< ^'^'» ) pqf^qt- “ [ qjiftqiT. 

iFrrn^nir^:|| 

t 

4if^q qf q i:Tq^ q«rr %qns qq^Sf 55^q»! i 
S^q^Eq qq^ II ii 

“ ^Rgqq-” i ^rc^qqfJr^^r, m =iqr1q^roiar^ f^q- 
I IsrqTOT^ ^qrq:, f2>55^cqTq qj95^ I %q- 

qfh-“3^q?q fqqT^q»=qq^ti qg:3:5qTK^” li II 

??5i?qni^iiqrqrqfffl:ii qr?I?qr ? f??cT — 

10 







[ gt n. 


erwf^srr ;r^ 5 |grr?^ i 

5T«rT sscjtM sr^r^^r sr^%5 n II 

“^fgr” |r%, ?!!iT%^ ?*!TrR^: qrl^q^i^q^s^qi^ I 
siH-i ^s^rqrcqffr || || 


3 ITl[rgJ^qi?^RT(^clTf^W 
I cl«TT g TO«Tf s^qr 
3 lT^«T:’-^??cl 3 IT 5 — 


qjiJgrfqqjRff, 


qcjq^Ti qf^^T% 5 qT 

II 


gr^r^’^qr^^qqjTirnqr^qq^rf^j 1 
goTHT^ajor^^T ^cHEcT^qp^W’Wsj^ M« H 


'‘grirr-” I qqr ^^qrjqrtq sciqqrjqqjT- 

q;qf^qrq^Ri?fTqf^qt q'qqcqqqjrft- 
oqgqqiTRM sq’qqraqf^ 3 ^qfq^q ^ 
f4isg[q II n 


JTcqiqftq^T 5 [^TT%qT fq^xIT ST^ 3 ^?^?%- 
qq^T, aqr q^m^fq 3 ^- 
w^farR n>Tra^rcq- qTqkTfqrq ccfeqf fqq'qr sf^ qq: ^^- 

r%f^^rfr% it i 

q^T s^jfrflr 5^ qijjrgqf^ 5^q^q ii II 

“ q#: ” I gf qr^g^qr sfqqg^ar, q^ 3 *«q?^qrg^- 
® 3 qi% qrqcT | ^rgqrq^qr j\ f 55 qv|^i%q;^^ 47 =?j^r qqr^Tri:*!- 
f^qre=qqr^55r q^q^^, ci^r sgr qqr Jiqg^, 



3!T5[ir^t ?T^q[i q^jw^rKrf^ ^ 5^: ^- 

^'^ s'gf^qjr cgT ff I?q4; \\\\ \\ 

sqftquft, qf«rq?!? 

(^^'j)f^^'>i3^qq> f^^^qr«fcqm , ^rqra^iOTqkqiqi^ q^q- 
^gqRrifgr^if^iir n pq ^qf^rfq^^t^iqrci^l 3??! 

i^q^q =q q mi: jrfqq[qTqwTqTS%, f^tocqr^ I 
<!wg; ‘ q^qfqqr^rqqj 5T% q=q:”-^cfrqt ^ifRq^f^r^sqr- 

w^qq'S'^tqfqt^rRr n 

?Twr^ s;?T q g^ qifq i 

^ JiRr^mr ii Vi w 

“ciwrcf^” ffci 1 3T5r q qjf^c[.q# qeq'^, q 

( )q?Tf^?Tr:- ^ I 5 m\m 

itwf(T»rqr*if9qfrr^qf gq't g^qq %tq | q^q^r??- 

Sqq ^Tqrr. ii I 

floqqcTrqrq ^qrft^qqqq^, qqrqq'q q^frqi'q^Trqcqrq, q??;- 
^^q =q ^rqj^miq: ^qrFqf^ ^j^qqiq | qrqiqqqqr: a^qqqqr- 
^fq f^qqjTq?i^q^qe>f5Fq ^qqn^q ^q*2^^Hl i\\\ 


{\%\) nfwrqqf- 
f^H^M^qwqt^qor 
qTqfrrq^^q q Rt^- 
qjiii 


q^qq^qq ‘ qf IcPi^T qpqqqwqqqf: 
q^q 3Tqq% ’ I i%gT'qqT: 3 ^ 
^m. ? ?9?q 


g qSJT^mqTJTRTrJRT Jr«%: I 

^^*=sr jwsqrqf^ 11 11 

“ ” |r% I sixqfRq^ qqrf% qqtKfiweaifi’ ^^qrV 

I “ ” qrqrqqW^ “ sfifqqr sscrr^” <^qi- 



I [*«?. cT. 

, 55 t«fiTm^ *i 

II K\ \\ 


3 i^»Tci*ft? 5 r cicsr^,< ?m: f^^qei aiif — 


RSFarsrnRirerrw^ *f 




m^ II II 


I 


I cTT^fmgqss^qf^ I ^^qq- 

( ) arwiT^r- ^RTOxq^qfrf^^w^re^?I^%^^4^^q^I®- 
rrwsT^tqf^: « ^xqg^F'qeirgr^rrcqiTftfr^gcq- 

«icr |qfl:qq?ijr*=qr^i^fs:qqq^ er^rcqir^3q3iqqrcT,-cT^'^qq«^- 
«iT^ cimigicqiTt jqqqfq | ^ ^TFrq^“ ^ II 


f^^'Jicqc! 3Fr5-“3Tf^qrq I «wqqq^ f| 

(^^^)q?q|rr=TW ?T^?qq^^^qf^^gTFrq:- 

affq'rfq- “ sif^q^qr^J’ | f^qcTqfqqcTfiqr 
sfq fqq4q:, ^ ‘3#q?ki^’, 
^q^q«k*=qr^ | cTxqfqqqcqri ^ 5 [iqrqq«fqmrq: || 

^?[cITifl?^FqRT 5 ^ cTt^fr^q , cRI 
( fipaq^R SRrqqsqif^^ 

WITITT’R’E^^^'T- , V 

wit (iwiTHaOTti am m aftwmmu OTWirg^^iTOs 

Hg^: II • ” |f^=f^q4^iET- 

^wij wqqif^q^qqraqr aqr sfq ci^Rqm^iqi cmf^qq- 
^i^Rqq^qf^qcqr ssl^q?qT sf^ ^qqr ci^qw^ 

r^ f^qi mrq;, q^ii^in 3?f^ — 







ST 31^1 s^fJTq^ sfq ftrcTcq^Tcra: ” || 

fTSf^qgxjTq^'' srmq, sn?^” \ ‘sttit^’ i??t- 

(^^v.) eTf^?T=T- ^ I%^W5TfTOf^ I W|: ‘ 

f^remFqq=qsrr: ’ ^ri [fto=ci^i3<t.] | 

qrfsirOrff^: ii 

^n% qr?rr5^ eq sqrqRr sricqR qi%q?[rf% I 

qcI^Tc-qf^ sqrqrTTlw qf^q^ ‘ STT^qJ | 

^3Tf^i«it ^tr*=q^c[^’ qjj: qm^rlq I 

^qjqf^ =q qffcqtqiqt | m: I 

sicT ^ “q I qsq'r f| TqrftcTi ssqq, ciTqrq q^r: ^qmrfq^ 
JEqrfiicffqq: I srqqr “qrftq” ^fcr ‘‘ 3 ^ sfw, q q^qqq?” | 
9 Tqqqqf^cqrwrqiqcqqrf-“qi 5 ^r^” I arqicjqrw q ^qrfir- 
qeqq 3Trf-“q q” ^ici II 

qq ‘qqrqf^ q;%^qf?:rf^i?:i[r^ f^q% sf^, q^- 

i^\<) qfqfrT=T- fR^qq^q-qf^wif^' |cqq 3iT?-“3Tq- 
«rqft5rq?qjT 11 v j 

^ •Sv 

gq^frqsqq^ qa^irq II ^ » II 


( ^«is) qtqqr^r- 3qfr?:5tq q=sqgr^cqiRq Tq«icft- 

?'WTqj ®3 U — 


qq rq 


qqq^ 5 ^qj sfiyq>qi?qreqqj ^qq®; 11 11 • 

“^q” fr% I qtqJ^qqrqr^qfrlt f| qi^q: qifcTs^ I ^ 


\ “gf4 " fw I 



5f^T^r%'^ JH^IT: ntT?M*mT%®TcT # SI^: | 

^ SS^WT w: ?im4*T^cT^RIcT^ | 
5TO?w?rj^iqi^^ri^^5R^»«r!Tifq | ^- 

55a!t|3JRrjravif I ■ cm cim?T^ iTOp^e^iricimfrJrg- 
r^Ji% I ^fRjjfJifcqr ^ ffcT 

iTffcT:” I “3i5rR'4cl” |r% “^5^:” ?I% ^51- 

I ^rr%?qr a fs^T ci^ 
3p?^^«RiffR^^?ii3qq%Rfh II u 

^qr^ctcT-'^TfcfSf^qrfq^ ^ | ^ 

( ^^>0 ) tF 5, ^jqctr =q ^qR:, wtpqqiRc!! 

JW<I%i»ig,, nrxw^liqai ‘»!l*- 
f^5ifr II ^icqq^fqqqcq^ | jt ^ciqi^f?ri R^t I 

^ =q qn:PTtqr*TM^%:, cisircTTqmiRm qjc'q'rqtqrg^gq: jq: 

55r wqr5^^ o;^, ^ s^fir?5TOT??T?qT l 
^ #jftn sfq cPfr: snr^^rJTsrr^ il %\ \\ 

“ ^r ” |r% I qf^g qm ^r:3rjt ^s^'RRtq? ^^qr 

( ) qf?ine: ii fqqqjj^qrm^ fiqr, ^fqqqj^jqnci^ ?[i55[r- 

3Rqr% I str'q^qf^jqiRT^rqj^ f? ci^^rqt, f^q^- 
qRiq q qs'f^qqlm, ai|^ ?q q'lqfqfq 1 5qf:qTq;f? 

. qf^ffqq: 5Ki^?q5:f^qqqq IcqpqqRqqr shcw | 
iq^qi‘<$qTf^qfq qr^qrqfqqqir^qicqr ‘ qc[^^qqj q^rr j 


X “ff?'ii!”ffffTrs[»tTrw I 



«?r. I 's^ 

frifJr i%^- 

^ifa*5rF^Hfq ^|JT^ I cT^ fqf^ ^mj ^ 

5 % \ q^qr«ff ^ rrf g?tf 

51 JTiifcT qqistqcT: I ci['^^^ch-“j?qr5T5T^Tn'^cT ^ui* | 
«PT srgsq^ ?f^r qq^sR^, ct^w^ 5 rr?^r- 

\\i%\\ 


?qi^cig:;-“ ecq5FcFTq?Tr^cqjR#Tr§:5T5cn:qq ffFR ?Rq ^C- 
qR:RTr^% 

R^r^?qr?IT<n^lT?^* ^Tr^fT^ sfq ^ Jg^q^ qfqoTTqq^fqcqTcI ? 
STR^qq^Ifr « ^ g J ^ 

■J^r?clTqf!R^qi^giqqq:-?r% ‘ sq^rsq^fq^Rq-qqr cTWff'^qr- 
qqq’ fi^w^'. | ‘ qf?rq 'qiqR^’i&qq: qiqkqq=qqT sf^q- 
cFiqqrqj^f®: %qsq:, cjcT5SfiqqjTqn%: ’ q^Rqqfqq^” 

3 FTf — 


w^ ap ^ rgrTr>qq*Tr^ •qmr^iJTwqiRorsrmr i 
, f^% 5 qq:gfjnrf cT^r^ir?:; h 

I cr\qgr^fcq;roerq[>qRr(^^<3TRq^(%c(T^.. 

/ o, , \ ^prrrn- qTq?^qq=q% ?: 5 'qq 75 T*Trqciqr 

( ) OMf m.— 

fqfqq;Rri7 q^^sia- q 5!r?Tfqqfq55!?rtJirq qr55rq sR^q"^ I sjq- 
u ^ li^qqr qi^^ftqi'qp 

sjqqq I qxq^rqfqccrqRqfqqqf^*i5Tqi%®rqr^qqqi ^iq: qfq- 

^sfiqiqi^qqq’. ? qqf^rqTqq;i 5 ;>JTq[^r ” w/ 

•^'q?qqrqrfqi??q: | scq^fqwirrqr si'q q q>?.rR5rTq fq^fq, qqr- 


\ 5 f 7 ’frRtfr»c-?Ttnt -- 1 



< « | |f m. tf. 

, sf?r f 95T555q[q[> ^iTT^^TOq^Tr?! I 

' ^ *S. ’ 

q?r55qf^qrq;q5ir=^'^ I =q qnc- 

‘qqi^qi^ qqkqf I ciqr 'qrg^qct-“ %5tq ^- 

• fqc<?f s«T “(T^ tirq^q T%t qrq^r fqqia^ sq 

TO#” =q [^%q-^RsfR ] I qCmr'qr#?n€?qir- 
#qfr«^r^cTc^R«q!a^ 'fcrmr^pTOlr li 1| 


(^\»->f)5lfnr;ri^ 
^I%^Rqf-cT^g%: II 


^qT^<T-“ qf^ TOR^qr^f^ qa?jfO- 
T^ciqr s# q;^r s^ qfqcqi^ ? ” 
^ 3TT^ — 


sn& ?T€rr€% ^^fcnsjfqrqi; snjw f qf ^^ I 
I rqrr%q> gw ^q<?q«rMlr% ii II 
“q#” I siqr^sqf^qiiqT'cirqcT^qiqf^iqT cT={qfiqr- 
fqqr q'tsivn^ 3[Tq: | qRsv:jr%cfiqjTqi'^qqiJtq “qr^ 

5rfr#^”'' 5i%=fqqf%-‘‘ =q[%r4cqrcT” ii%=fciqq[5TqcqicT^| 
qqwq arg^qrq# fqfJfq#r-“ ^q;TFcTqiq^”=3Tq^q>'qTr% “ arr^q- 
Pcrqjq^”=3lfqqrf^-ffqv{q “ %q^q^” |:^qfqqq*qrRlf^^ 
pq: iK<r II 


(^'»'^)qn?q5ti^- qqi^qiqqri^'^ s'q?Rciqtnqic[qiq 
?q q^qfq«<^iatq>T ll q^qfqqqqjcoiqrf — 

S^itq^f^orT i 

ft«rr3?q%sr^?irf^?5qf5 q^r ajrnqrq; ii ii 
'•• “3^q” ^"cT 1 “5§iqJ’ g^nqqrm, 
qrq^^ I ‘^qwf^'qr” qffq^q, ^sq#-' 

“ f^qcqcqf%q?5qim;cq# qq gqiqiq ” ^ 1 % r qq ’ ?#=q^qq ,- 



cqf^aqri” “f^^” II H 


qeqsiCT’i^ii'^ 

qsPRff^Fpar <WW«- /. _ ^ 

qfSenL 11 f?l: . aST ? ’-5^ ®^“- 

HcR^^rf^anvi' si??r i 

aiigfi ic fi t qafe^Wj ^ ^ ajqr ^crpcifsr;^^ II ®® H 

« Q-35jj» ^ I “ 'ip^w: 

“3n§^^ s^qpqqr n^, 3^r§fe^*r qirr^orrq, ^ ^ 
?F5(^” 11 II 

f^»mM<*q<q T ssncoftsarT^^otsi ^d<^HlPr: H 
!(jf^Hw444Rl r? T r 5i?^r^*5Rrrsr ll «? K 

“f^” ^ I ^5,<nara««l 
?q » ^?lTqf, 9TTqfq^?q sqq^“®ii4qfe:” 

• ^ II 'S^ II 


( gq^mfqqrcqici^ 
SKTiJt «T«?q5. U q cT Sl«KK'q^9TIf 

-a 

^iFRtir te ^ sqf^ sq^; 
an<wiiPiq»ift<^^ « q<<4Kl^^fi*«->iwfq ii 's^ h 

^ I c!«IT =q 

*‘jjqRjf^Tcq^qsqq4q5qqqFq?q I 

qRFe4 n am ^qq q^q •• 

11 







^ q^WrJ?gf^: ^ il ^r% li 


^4 eiiteniTf 5 

3Rpr»T^f?^^cq%^ I gi^ij^ qrn%- 

gwif^ I ff%: ik^ftfci ?^gsFn#f?T n 's^ n 


?fmwcH^?iiT'Jif ffm: ?c!Ta ii ' 





?WT^ s# ?i?<i: 1^ 

m 



m ^rft^rnr 

( ) 

' w^ft: SBHir: 

v» arffr^^ ?ir*ft«;*n^ ... „, 

\\ afvsisraT^t 3S«f*Tf fTR^. '^\ cTWW *?»3T^SS[r ... 

\\ am:^^ 'M ^ ww 

3TfiTiTr^st?Kr?::... -xx ... 

1 

3ig^^>?r; ... «<» ^ ...' ... v 

«. 3fe?*RraiT<t ^ ... < 

^orm ... 

«• arrraiTfw^T*^^: ...S'* '*'* *nT*T3<c^ 

'^^ fc$tr nwir^r; '*i h f^siT *n%ffe!fR ... 

3W?»n>»T5r qJT: ... ^o STRTf^'^IrwV. '•V 

\<s ... vso v« 

HI 3;?: ^rs^St-qqHil, ... «,« q^^Eq T^^q;...* ... 

'*\ »Tq^lrf?^«TW: ... S\ gw^irrqFJT^tr <• 

i?fig;'^^H«iff <1 H« 

sfrq^^qr: HX '*’> ’J^c<i5r*Tq^ ... «... H<i 

«,v !?q ?Rqtwirqi?r ' 9 % \\ q^?TRft??Tms?3grc: ... xx 

>f«, irq IRPT^qf S^ S^ Sf*TR?irE[ ... WX 

V ... \S\ H afil^qqiwrqOTlr^... ^o 

W ^ 5t^?5rm H« 5rfr^^ x* 

•\s ... ifRJTfilrfflfW^W^ ... 

x'j qqrssssRT^^ ... H'® ^x 3^?a?r«T^ eiqrq. ... hh 
3rT5nir>i^r!Trpaf?n^q- -ks q^ f ^ rftr xs 

mg. * \c x< 

•HH ?i5( sRTJRor^q ... v»^ <iH 5r^wncmoinj:.‘.. ... 

VC ?Rn5(rwr^r^: ... « 

IS ... x» 5mnir|e«m 5 f% vc 



SSTfTV 

^»^ ... V ■ 

3 v»^ ^TRf.sROtT jftn M 

H'* ^f^ffltf^fJrfTJI ... ••• 

ar^T^qni; inFfiraq: ... %.«■ % ^gc ... •»» 

\< 7^rsTf vv» 'i'* ^^rnr'JRpfcsrTgc 

'>1 fti«J('T?wTTJinnrn ... cn « tr^jtrgs^: ... •>< 

?rfW SSfU^T^RETRg^ ... ?^WrtcHT?P^ ... >f\ 

'•^ ... c\ \s ^^155^4 fT^: 

Xv» «win^f?r*mra; ... x^ ^i^rinmf^ra^... ... 

X® ^o tgJTXt^gmaiTftr ’IH 





«is?i:^i;w?pni. ( 

8ifir^5r: 

) 

aif^SW; (l<v) 

3faiW^(^'‘*) —XX 

3f5t^:(’(Xv) ^X 

arftqm (’^•S) 

3if2Fld^««iqH(XVS) ... w 

XM ) ..• 

j[^r^^m:(X'iX) — 

ijf55cjn«if g»nRrF’WR:(x«x). 

**l4<kli“l«>^: ( ^0 ) ... IS 
qiraPf^’^ (X'»'^) 

gni^qqq ( <w ) 

3»ref*rT^:(l«X) X* 

i\%'*) ... 'sx 
jsw: (xxw) \yi 

(V) ... ^ 

|[?:(^X'») <,X 

rsrf^TT^'irnwfft*n>r:(isx). HS 

3^qf: xs 

5^fHw»R. (IIS) ... 


1 ( n< ) ...^ 

.ilf%: ( ixx )— 

!l^f^|%: (XV) ... v»X 

... 

) X^ 

IW[«PTfi[»I»t^»^ ( ) ... S 

nm»r 5 s^ff ( xx ) « 

(Xo») ... X* 

(xvx) ... n 

( X'lrX ) xs 

(x^H) ... vx 

xr>R (XX*) XX 

(x<^) ... '^'^ 

aMiaRi5l^'ai^( vvi) ... x^ 
aTXI5iarTfWlf«l«J.(<«) ... Xw 

(xv<).... v»* 

IpIot: (xvl) VX 

^«5FfrxPwq»xn^('i<s)... Hx 
(xxs) ... XX 
i|(|qwx'xf5ireT»t«3;(XHX) ... 






<1^. 

V 

IS 

V 



^V 


^'s 



in 




IV 

Itf 



I’. 

lo 


1^ 


’I 






(lo*) 


(loo) \ 


(1»1) ^ 




V 


^V 


(1VX) 1 


IV 


1<f 

^sc 

(n*) ^ 

VC 


vs 


V 

(l«o) 1 

V\V 

0<^) \ 


... • 

‘’^tw 

... 

fer\*r ... 
"teqmii. ... 

°5RR?T^"... 

gr^?t^sa7«rf' 

... 

°^cigjrr ... 

o o 

H*r?«r ... 
^r?fr° ... 

... 

... 

‘’ffin%'‘ ... 

... 



* • • • • • I 

3?^’ ... ... 



•^317^ ... 



O^o) 

••• ttf 


mi 

.. feff 
.. feff 
.. °w?r^ 

. 3*n!Tiw^’ 

. msfrqr’ 

. °STt52ir>° 

• 3 

?r!TTiT?r; 

. a?1^^ 
^frai^rR: 
’^S7 

Oo) 

WT9r 



2t.'* 


aiptH. 






• • • 

trgfni 

• 

(’ll*) ^ 

... 

• • • 



IS 

”«TfX'>n^‘’ 

• • • 



1 

tIT*[c?\ . . . 

•v ^ 

• • • 

*ir 



• ^RffOr” ... 

# 

• * • 

•fc ^ o 

«?ir i*T 


N» 

%T5° ... 

• • » 


vso 

1«l 

... 

• » « 

?r»f: 

\90 

1<S 

vt^aF° ... 

• » • 



IV 

faf-5 

• • • 

fef 5 

N»^ 

^1 


• » « 




( ^'s'n ) ... 

• • • 

( XH'n ar ) 

vjl^ 

IX 

%Rn ... 

• • • 



’ X* 





ns 

'*Ttm5j... 

• • » 




'mnpT... 

• • -# 


\9^ 

^n 

'??iRirr... 

• • • 

*^m5T 

c\ 

C 

3^^” ... 

• » • 

g«tq' 







