Crest-J ewel of Wisdom 


Crest-Jewel of Wisdom 


and other writings of 

Sankarachar y a 


"B 

13 3 
SH 
M5 


Translations and Commentaries by 

CHARLES JOHNSTON 


Jheosophical University Press 
Covina, California 


Theosophical University Press 
Covina, California 


First Edition, 1946 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



Preface 


T his little volume with its foundation-stones of Truth is 
an effort to further the second object of the Theosophical 
Society as it was originally expressed by H. P. Blavatsky in 
The Key to Theosophy: 

To promote the study of Aryan and other Scriptures, of the 
World’s religion and sciences, and to vindicate the importance of 
old Asiatic literature, namely, of the Brahmanical, Buddhist, 
and Zoroastrian philosophies. 

The translations herein are reprints from the Oriental 
Department Papers published by William Quan Judge in 
1894, 1895, and 1896, as well as from Judge’s Magazine, 
The Path. In introducing Charles Johnston, then a member 
of the Theosophical Society, as the translator of the San¬ 
skrit works to be produced in his Oriental Papers, Judge 
writes: 

Of his qualifications there is no doubt, as he has had experi¬ 
ence in this field, has also for some time been teaching Sanskrit, 
and brings to the work a sincere sympathy with Indian thought 
as well as devotion to the Society which will without question 
make the matter furnished of value as well as of interest. 

In Sankaracharya (the blessed teacher) we have an ex¬ 
ample of the statement that “Masters are living facts.” 
Mankind needs such assurance these days, and needs not 
only the inspiration of the story of a man who has lived 
divinely, but also his kindly and strengthening words of wis¬ 
dom. What greater gift could the Hindu sage have left us 
than that of a collection of soul-stirring thoughts? 

For those who, with hearts fervent with compassion, seek 


835284 


V.1 


PREFACE 


the holy path that brings to birth a ‘sage of boundless vi¬ 
sion/ Sankaracharya’s Crest-Jewel of Wisdom will be a 
practical and inspiring guide to life. Its teachings, the shared 
realizations of an enlightened god-man, tell us the laws by 
which we may ‘untie the bonds of unwisdom/ and thus, ever¬ 
more free, with minds calm and pellucid and hearts purified 
of reward-desiring actions, come to know and partake of the 
majestic power, light, and universal kinship of the Divine 
within us, our birthright as humans, and our passport to 
grander attainments in vaster spheres of consciousness. 

Just as the sun with its splendor and its glories greets us 
every morning when we awake and silently through the day 
nourishes us in all parts of our being, and later as it sets 
at night, leaves a glow of rich color suggesting a spiritual 
mystery to be grasped somewhere, somehow — maybe in 
the morn’s returning light — so the challenging message of 
Sankaracharya’s jewel-thoughts braces the spirits of world- 
weary ones as they turn to its radiant wisdom. They become 
illumined by the divine fire permeating its words, and as they 
turn from the study of its verses enriched for another of life’s 
experiences, the glow of the gleaned awakenings will become 
a haunting memory leading them back to its precepts for 
another sunrise and sunset of the spirit. 

Judith Tyberg 

Theosophical University 

March, 1946 


Table of Contents 


Introductory 

Sankara, the Teacher.3 


The Crest-Jewel of Wisdom 


First Steps on the Path .... 

9 

Self, Potencies, Vestures .... 

17 

The Witness. 

36 

Finding the Real Self .... 

46 

The Power of Mind-Images 

50 

Free Even in Life. 

62 

The Three Kinds of Works 

70 

Master and Pupil . . 

74 

The Perfect Sage. 

81 

For Ever Free . 

86 

Other Writings 


The Heritage of the Brahmans 

93 

The Awakening to the Self 

. 107 

The Awakening to Reality 

. 117 

The Essence of the Teaching 

. 137 

The Teachings of Sankara 

. 145 

The Song of the Self .... 

. 151 

Appendix 


A Symposium on the Life of Sankaracharya 

. 155 








Introductory 


by Charles Johnston 


Sankara, the Teacher 


> T , he Upanishads, Buddha, and Sankara: these are the 
three great lights of Indian wisdom. The Upani¬ 
shads far away in the golden age; in the bright dawn that 
has faded so many ages ago. Buddha, the Awakened 
One, who, catching in his clear spirit the glow of that 
early dawn, sought to reflect it in the hearts of all men, 
of whatever race, of whatever nation; sought to break 
down the barriers of caste and priestly privilege; to 
leave each man alone with the Universe, with no medi¬ 
ator between. But scattering abroad the rays of wis¬ 
dom, Buddha found that the genius of each man, of 
each race, could only reflect one little beam; and that 
in thus making the light the property of all men, the 
purity and completeness of the light might be impaired. 

Then followed Sankaracharya — Sankara the Teach¬ 
er — who set himself to the preservation of the light; 
to burnishing the casket that held the lamp of wisdom. 
Busying himself chiefly with India, he saw that the 
light must be preserved, as far as its completeness and 
perfection were concerned, within the Brahman order, 
where the advantages of heredity, of ages of high ideals 
and rigid discipline could best secure the purity of the 
light; could best supply a body of men, fitted by char¬ 
acter and training to master the high knowledge, to sus¬ 
tain the moral effort that made the glory of India’s 
Golden Age. 


4 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


This task of fitting the Brahman order to carry the 
torch of wisdom was undertaken by Sankara the Teach¬ 
er in three ways. First, by commenting on the Great 
Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita, he rendered the 
knowledge of the Golden Age into the thought and lan¬ 
guage of the Brahmans of his day. Second, by writing 
a series of preparatory works, of catechisms and man¬ 
uals, he made smooth the path of those who would take 
the first steps on the path of wisdom. Thirdly, by a 
system of reform and discipline within the Brahman 
order, he did all that sound practice could do to second 
clear precept. 

The system formed by Sankara within the Brahman 
order largely continues at the present day. The radiant 
points of this system are the monasteries founded by 
the Teacher, where a succession of teachers, each • 
initiated by his predecessor, carry on the spiritual tra¬ 
dition of the great Sankara unbroken. 

Of commentaries on the Upanishads and the Bhag¬ 
avad Gita, many, perhaps, were written in a gradual 
series leading up from the simple truths to the more 
profound mysteries; so that, with one after another of 
these treatises in hand, the learner was gradually led 
to the heart of the mystery which lies “like a germ of 
generation” well concealed in these matchless theoso- 
phic documents. These commentaries were followed 
by others, the work of Sankara’s pupils; and though 
these works of explanation are very numerous, all those 
that are published seem to belong to the earlier stages 
of learning, and leave the deeper passages and problems 
of the Upanishads still unsolved. 


s 


SANKARA, THE TEACHER 

But the other part of Sankara’s work, the manuals 
and catechisms for learners, are complete and perfect. 
They really teach, quite plainly and lucidly, the first 
steps on the path of wisdom; they point out, with clear 
insistence, the qualities that are necessary to make 
these first steps fruitful; qualities without which the 
learner may remain, hesitating and halting, on the 
threshold, through lack of the force and sterling moral 
worth which alone make any further progress possible. 

Nor are these necessary qualities difficult to under¬ 
stand. They are not queer psychic powers that only 
flatter vanity; they are not mere intellectual tricks that 
leave the heart cold; they are rather the simple quali¬ 
ties of sterling honesty, of freedom from selfishness 
and sensuality — which have formed the basis of every 
moral code; the virtues so common and commonplace 
on the lips, but not quite so common in the life and 
character. 

These treatises of Sankara speak to the common 
understanding and moral sense in an unparalleled de¬ 
gree. They are an appeal to the reason that has hardly 
ever been equalled for clearness and simplicity by the 
sages of the earth. Their aim is Freedom (Moksha), 
“Freedom from the bondage of the world.” This aim 
speaks to every one, awakens an echo in every heart, 
appeals to the universal hope of common humanity. 

But it is not enough for the mind to follow the lucid 
sentences of Sankara. “Freedom from the bondage of 
the world” demands something more. “Sickness is not 
cured by saying ‘Medicine,’ but by drinking it; so a 
man is not set free by the name of the Eternal, but by 


6 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


discerning the Eternal.” The teaching must be woven 
into life and character if it is to bear fruit; it is not 
enough to contemplate the virtue of freedom from 
selfishness and sensuality in the abstract. 

One of these treatises, “The Crest-Jewel of Wisdom,” 
will be translated here. It will be divided according 
to the natural sections of the text, beginning with the 
first steps on the path and ending with the complete 
teaching of Sankara’s philosophy so far as that teaching 
can be put into words. Hardly any notes will be neces¬ 
sary, as the language of the teacher is lucidity itself. 
Every word is defined and every definition enlarged 
and repeated. 

It is not, however, the object of these papers to put 
forward a presentation of eastern thought merely to be 
read and forgotten. We shall spare no pains of repeti¬ 
tion and amplification to make the thoughts of the 
East quite clear. But much remains to be done by 
readers themselves. They must make the thoughts of 
Sankara and the sages their own spiritual property if 
they are to benefit by them, and as a preliminary for 
this first chapter of Sankara’s teaching, the.“four Per¬ 
fections” should be learned by heart and taken to heart. 


The Crest -Jewel of Wisdom 


VlVEKACHUDAMANI 


First Steps Oil the Path 

Prologue 
(Verses 1 — IS) 

t bow before Govinda, the objectless object of final 
J- success in the highest wisdom, who is supreme bliss 
and the true teacher. 

For beings a human birth is hard to win, then man¬ 
hood and holiness, then excellence in the path of wise 
law; hardest of all to win is wisdom. Discernment 
between Self and not-Self, true judgment, nearness to 
the Self of the Eternal and Freedom are not gained 
without a myriad of right acts in a hundred births. 
This triad that is won by the bright one’s favor is hard 
to gain: humanity, aspiration, and rest in the great 
spirit. After gaining at last a human birth, hard to 
win, then manhood and knowledge of the teaching, if 
one strives not after Freedom he is a fool. He, suicidal, 
destroys himself by grasping after the unreal. Who 
is more self-deluded than he who is careless of his own 
welfare after gaining a hard-won human birth and man¬ 
hood, too? Let them declare the laws, let them offer 
to the gods, let them perform all rites, let them love 
the gods; without knowing the oneness with the Self, 
Freedom is not won even in a hundred years of the 
Evolver. “There is no hope of immortality through 
riches,” says the scripture. It is clear from this that 
rites cannot lead to Freedom. 

Therefore let the wise one strive after Freedom, 


10 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


giving up all longing for sensual self-indulgence; ap¬ 
proaching the good, great Teacher (the Higher Self), 
with soul intent on the object of the teaching. Let him 
by the Self raise the Self, sunk in the ocean of the 
world, following the path of union through complete 
recognition of oneness. Setting all rites aside, let the 
wise, learned ones who approach the study of the Self 
strive for Freedom from the bondage of the world. 
Rites are to purify the thoughts, but not to gain the 
reality. The real is gained by Wisdom, not by a myriad 
of rites. When one steadily examines and clearly sees 
a rope, the fear that it is a serpent is destroyed. Knowl¬ 
edge is gained by discernment, by examining, by in¬ 
struction, but not by bathing, nor gifts, nor a hundred 
holdings of the breath. Success demands first ripeness; 
questions of time and place are subsidiary. Let the 
seeker after self-knowledge find the Teacher (the Higher 
Self), full of kindness and knowledge of the Eternal. 

The Four Perfections 
(Verses 16 — 34) 

He is ripe to seek the Self who is full of knowledge 
and wisdom, reason and discernment, and who bears 
the well-known marks. 

He is ready to seek the Eternal who has Discernment 
and Dispassion; who has Restfulness and the other 
graces. 

Four perfections are numbered by the wise. When 
they are present there is success, but in their absence 
is failure. 

First is counted the Discernment between things 


FIRST STEPS ON THE PATH 


11 


lasting and unlasting. Next Dispassion, the indifference 
to self-indulgence here and in paradise. Then the Six 
Graces, beginning with Restfulness. Then the longing 
for Freedom. 

A certainty like this — the Eternal is real, the fleet¬ 
ing world is unreal; — this is that Discernment between 
things lasting and unlasting. 

And this is Dispassion — a perpetual willingness to 
give up all sensual self-indulgence — everything lower 
than the Eternal, through a constant sense of their in¬ 
sufficiency. 

Then the Six Graces: a steady intentness of the mind 
on its goal; — this is Restfulness. 

And the steadying of the powers that act and per¬ 
ceive, each in its own sphere, turning them back from 
sensuality; — this is Self-control. 

Then the raising of the mind above external things; 

— this is the true Withdrawal. 

The enduring of all ills without petulance and with¬ 
out self-pity; — this is the right Endurance. 

An honest confidence in the teaching and the Teacher; 

— this is that Faith by which the treasure is gained. 

The intentness of the soul on the pure Eternal; — 

this is right Meditation, but not the indulgence of fancy. 

The wish to untie, by discernment of their true na¬ 
ture, all the bonds woven by unwisdom, the bonds of 
selfishness and sensuality; — this is the longing for 
Freedom. 

Though at first imperfect, these qualities gradually 
growing through Dispassion, Restfulness, and the other 
graces and the Teacher’s help will gain their due. 


12 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


When Dispassion and longing for Freedom are strong, 
then Restfulness and the other graces will bear fruit. 

But when these two — Dispassion and longing for 
Freedom — are lacking, then Restfulness and the other 
graces are a mere appearance, like water in the desert. 

Chief among the causes of Freedom is devotion, the 
intentness of the soul on its own nature. Or devotion 
may be called intentness on the reality of the Self. 

Let him who possesses these Perfections and who 
would learn the reality of the Self, approach the wise 
Teacher (the Higher Self), from whom comes the 
loosing of bonds; who is full of knowledge and perfect; 
who is not beaten by desire, who really knows the Eter¬ 
nal; who has found rest in the Eternal, at peace like a 
fuelless fire; who is full of selfless kindness, the friend 
of all that lives. Serving the Teacher with devotion 
and aspiration for the Eternal, and finding harmony 
with him, seek the needed knowledge of the Self. 

The Appeal to the Higher Self 
(Verses 35 — 40) 

“I submit myself to thee, Master, friend of the 
bowed-down world and river of selfless kindness. 

“Raise me by thy guiding light that pours forth the 
nectar of truth and mercy, for I am sunk in the ocean 
of the world. 

“I am burned by the hot flame of relentless life and 
torn by the winds of misery: save me from death, for 
I take refuge in thee, finding no other rest.” 

The great good ones dwell in peace, bringing joy to 
the world like the return of spring. Having crossed the 


FIRST STEPS ON THE PATH 


13 


ocean of the world, they ever help others to cross over. 

For this is the very nature of the great-souled ones 
(Mahatmas) — their swiftness to take away the weari¬ 
ness of others. So the soft-rayed moon of itself 
soothes the earth, burned by the fierce sun’s heat. 

“Sprinkle me with thy nectar voice that brings the 
joy of eternal bliss, pure and cooling, falling on me as 
from a cup, like the joy of inspiration; for I am burnt 
by the hot, scorching flames of the world’s fire. 

“Happy are they on whom thy light rests, even for a 
moment, and who reach harmony with thee. 

“How shall I cross the ocean of the world? Where 
is the path? What way must I follow? I know not, 
Master. Save me from the wound of the world’s pain.” 

The Beginning of the Teaching 
(Verses 41 — 71) 

To him, making this appeal and seeking help, 
scorched by the flame of the world’s fire, the Great Soul 
beholding him with eyes most pitiful brings speedy 
comfort. 

The Wise One instils the truth in him who has ap¬ 
proached him longing for Freedom, who is following 
the true path, calming the tumult of his mind and bring¬ 
ing Restfulness. 

“Fear not, wise one, there is no danger for thee. 
There is a way to cross over the ocean of the world, and 
by this path the sages have reached the shore. 

“This same path I point out to thee, for it is the way 
to destroy the world’s fear. Crossing the ocean of the 


14 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


world by this path, thou shalt win the perfect joy.” 

By discerning the aim of the wisdom-teaching 
(Vedanta) is born that most excellent knowledge. Then 
comes the final ending of the world’s pain. The voice 
of the teaching plainly declares that faith, devotion, 
meditation, and the search for union are the means of 
I reedom for him who would be free. He who is perfect 
in these wins Freedom from the bodily bondage woven 
by unwisdom. 

When the Self is veiled by unwisdom there arises a 
binding to the not-self, and from this comes the pain 
of world-life. The fire of wisdom lit by discernment 
between these two — Self and not-Self — will wither up 
the source of unwisdom, root and all. 

The Pupil Asks 

“Hear with selfless kindness, Master. I ask this 
question: receiving the answer from thy lips I shall 
gain my end. 

“What is, then, a bond? And how has this bond 
come? What cause has it? And how can one be free? 

“What is not-Self and what the Higher Self? And 
how can one discern between them?” 

The Master Answers 

“Happy art thou. Thou shalt attain thy end. Thy 
kin is blest in thee. For thou seekest to become the 
Eternal by freeing thyself from the bond of unwisdom. 

“Sons and kin can pay a father’s debts, but none but 
a man’s self can set him free. 


FIRST STEPS ON THE PATH 


IS 


“If a heavy burden presses on the head others can 
remove it, but none but a man’s self can quench his 
hunger and thirst. 

“Health is gained by the sick who follow the path 
of healing: health does not come through the acts of 
others. 

“The knowledge of the real by the eye of clear in¬ 
sight is to be gained by one’s own sight and not by the 
teacher’s. 

“The moon’s form must be seen by one’s own eyes; 
it can never be known through the eyes of another. 

“None but a man’s self is able to untie the knots of 
unwisdom, desire, and former acts, even in a myriad 
of ages. 

“Freedom is won by a perception of the Self’s one¬ 
ness with the Eternal, and not by the doctrines of 
Union or of Numbers, nor by rites and sciences. 

“The form and beauty of the lyre and excellent skill 
upon its strings may give delight to the people, but will 
never found an empire. 

“An eloquent voice, a stream of words, skill in ex¬ 
plaining the teaching, and the learning of the learned; 
these bring enjoyment but not freedom. 

“When the Great Reality is not known the study of 
the scriptures is fruitless; when the Great Reality is 
known the study of the scriptures is also fruitless. 

“A net of words is a great forest where the fancy 
wanders; therefore the reality of the Self is to be stren¬ 
uously learned from the knower of that reality. 

“How can the hymns (Vedas) and the scriptures 
profit him who is bitten by the serpent of unwisdom? 


16 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


How can charms or medicine help him without the 
medicine of the knowledge of the Eternal? 

“Sickness is not cured by saying ‘Medicine,’ but by 
drinking it. So a man is not set free by the name of 
the Eternal without discerning the Eternal. 

“Without piercing through the visible, without know¬ 
ing the reality of the Self, how can men gain Freedom 
by mere outward words that end with utterances? 

“Can a man be king by saying, ‘I am king,’ without 
destroying his enemies, without gaining power over the 
whole land? 

“Through information, digging, and casting aside the 
stones, a treasure may be found, but not by calling it 
to come forth. 

“So by steady effort is gained the knowledge of those 
who know the Eternal, the lonely, stainless reality 
above all illusion; but not by desultory study. 

“Hence with all earnest effort to be free from the 
bondage of the world, the wise must strive themselves, 
as they would to be free from sickness. 

“And this question put by thee to-day must be solved 
by those who seek Freedom; this question that breathes 
the spirit of the teaching, that is like a clue with hidden 
meaning. 

“Hear, then, earnestly, thou wise one, the answer 
given by me; for understanding it thou shalt be free 
from the bondage of the world.” 


Self, Potencies, Vestures 

>tIhe first cause of Freedom is declared to be an utter 
turning back from lust after unenduring things. 
Thereafter Restfulness, Control, Endurance; a perfect 
Renouncing of all acts that cling and stain. 

Thereafter, the divine Word, a turning of the mind 
to it, a constant thinking on it by the pure one, long 
and uninterrupted. 

Then ridding himself altogether of doubt, and reach¬ 
ing wisdom, even here he enjoys the bliss of Nirvana. 

Then the discerning between Self and not-Self that 
you must now awaken to, that I now declare, hearing 
it, lay hold on it within yourself. 

The Vestures 
(V erses 72 — 107) 

Formed of the substances they call marrow, bone, 
fat, flesh, blood, skin and over-skin; fitted with greater 
and lesser limbs, feet, breast, trunk, arms, back, head; 
this is called the physical vesture by the wise — the 
vesture whose authority, as “I” and “my” is declared 
to be a delusion. 

Then these are the refined elements: the ethereal, 
the upper air, the flaming, water, and earth. 

These when mingled one with another become the 
physical elements, that are the causes of the physical 
vesture. The materials of them become the five sensu¬ 
ous things that are for the delight of the enjoyer — 
sounds and other things of sense. 


18 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


They who, fooled in these sensuous things, are bound 
by the wide noose of lust, hard to break asunder — 
they come and go, downwards and upwards on high, 
led by the swift messenger, their works. 

Through the five sensuous things five creatures find 
dissolution to the five elements, each one bound by his 
own character: the deer, the elephant, the moth, the 
fish, the bee; what then of man, who is snared by all 
the five? 

Sensuous things are keener to injure than the black 
snake’s venom; poison slays only him who eats it, but 
these things slay only him who beholds them with his 
eyes. 

He who is free from the great snare, so hard to be rid 
of, of longing after sensuous things, he indeed builds 
for Freedom, and not another, even though knowing 
the six philosophies. 

Those who, only for a little while rid of lust, long to 
be free, and struggle to reach the shore of the world- 
ocean — the toothed beast of longing lust makes them 
sink half way, seizing them by the throat, and swiftly 
carrying them away. 

By whom this toothed beast called sensuous things 
is slain by the sharp sword of true turning away from 
lust, he reaches the world-sea’s shore without hindrance. 
He who, soul-destroyed, treads the rough path of sensu¬ 
ous things, death is his reward, like him who goes out 
on a luckless day. But he who goes onward, through 
the word of the good Teacher who is friendly to all 
beings, and himself well-controlled, he gains the fruit 
and the reward, and his reward is the Real. 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 


19 


If the love of Freedom is yours, then put sensuous 
things far away from you, like poison. But love, as 
the food of the gods, serenity, pity, pardon, rectitude, 
peacefulness and self-control; love them and honor 
them forever. 

He who every moment leaving undone what should 
be done — the freeing of himself from the bonds of 
beginningless unwisdom — devotes himself to the fat¬ 
tening of his body, that rightly exists for the good of 
the other powers, such a one thereby destroys himself. 

He who seeks to behold the Self, although living to 
fatten his body, is going to cross the river, holding to 
a toothed beast, while thinking it a tree. 

For this delusion for the body and its delights is a 
great death for him who longs for Freedom; the delu¬ 
sion by the overcoming of which he grows worthy of 
the dwelling-place of the free. 

Destroy this great death, this infatuation for the 
body, wives and sons; conquering it, the pure ones 
reach the Pervader’s supreme abode. 

This faulty form, built up of skin and flesh, of blood 
and sinews, fat and marrow and bones, gross and full 
of impure elements; 

Born of the fivefold physical elements through deeds 
done before, the physical place of enjoyment of the 
Self; its mode is waking life, whereby there arises ex¬ 
perience of physical things. 

Subservient to physical objects through the outer 
powers, with its various joys — flower-chaplets, sandal, 
lovers — the Life makes itself like this through the 


20 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


power of the Self; therefore this form is pre-eminent in 
waking life. 

But know that this physical body wherein the whole 
circling life of the Spirit adheres, is but as the dwelling 
of the lord of the dwelling. 

Birth and age and death are the fate of the physical 
and all the physical changes from childhood onward; 
of the physical body only are caste and grade with their 
many homes, and differences of worship and dishonor 
and great honor belong to it alone. 

The powers of knowing — hearing, touch, sight, 
smell, taste — for apprehending sensuous things; the 
powers of doing — voice, hands, feet, the powers that 
put forth and generate — to effect deeds. 

Then the inward activity: mind, soul, self-assertion, 
imagination, with their proper powers; mind, ever in¬ 
tending and doubting; soul, with its character of cer¬ 
tainty as to things; self-assertion, that falsely attri¬ 
butes the notion of “I”; imagination, with its power of 
gathering itself together, and directing itself to its 
object. 

These also are the life-breaths: the forward-life, the 
downward-life, the distributing-life, the uniting-life; 
their activities and forms are different, as gold and 
water are different. 

The subtle vesture they call the eightfold inner be¬ 
ing made up thus: voice and the other four, hearing and 
the other four, ether and the other four, the forward 
life and the other four, soul and the other inward ac¬ 
tivities, unwisdom, desire, and action. 

Hear now about this subtle vesture or form vesture, 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 


21 


born of elements not fivefolded; it is the place of 
gratification, the enjoyer of the fruits of deeds, the 
beginningless disguise of the Self, through lack of self- 
knowledge. 

Dream-life is the mode of its expansion, where it 
shines with reflected light, through the traces of its 
own impressions; for in dream-life the knowing soul 
shines of itself through the many and varied mind- 
pictures made during waking-life. 

Here the higher self shines of itself and rules, taking 
on the condition of doer, with pure thought as its dis¬ 
guise, an unaffected witness, nor is it stained by the 
actions, there done, as it is not attached to them, there¬ 
fore it is not stained by actions, whatever they be, done 
by its disguise; let this form-vesture be the minister, 
doing the work of the conscious self, the real man, just 
as the tools do the carpenter’s work; thus this self re¬ 
mains unattached. 

Blindness or slowness or skill come from the goodness 
or badness of the eye; deafness and dumbness are of 
the ear and not of the Knower, the Self. 

Up-breathing, down-breathing, yawning, sneezing, the 
forward moving of breath, and the outward moving — 
these are the doings of the life-breaths, say those who 
know these things; of the life-breaths, also, hunger and 
thirst are properties. 

The inner activity dwells and shines in sight and the 
other powers in the body, through the false attribution 
of selfhood, as cause. 

Self-assertion is to be known as the cause of this 
false attribution of selfhood, as doer and enjoyer; and 


22 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


through substance and the other two potencies, it 
reaches expansion in the three modes. 

When sensuous things have affinity with it, it is 
happy; when the contrary, unhappy. So happiness 
and unhappiness are properties of this, and not of the 
Self which is perpetual bliss. 

Sensuous things are dear for the sake of the self, 
and not for their own sake; and therefore the Self it¬ 
self is dearest of all. 

Hence the Self itself is perpetual bliss — not for it 
are happiness and unhappiness; as in dreamless life, 
where are no sensuous things, the Self that is bliss — 
is enjoyed, so in waking-life it is enjoyed through the 
word, through intuition, teaching and deduction. 

The Three Potencies 
(Verses 108 — 135) 

The power of the supreme Master, that is called 
unmanifested, beginningless unwisdom whose very 
self is the three potencies, to be known through thought, 
by its workings — this is glamor (Maya), whereby all 
this moving world is made to grow. 

Neither being nor non-being nor of the self of both 
of these; neither divided nor undivided nor of the self 
of both of these; neither formed nor formless nor of the 
self of both of these — very wonderful and ineffable 
is its form. 

To be destroyed by the awakening to the pure, sec- 
ondless Eternal, as the serpent imagined in a rope, 
when the rope is seen; its potencies are called substance, 
force, and darkness; each of them known by their work- 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 


23 


ings. The self of doing belongs to force, whose power 
is extension, whence the pre-existent activities issued; 
rage and all the changes of the mind that cause sorrow 
are ever its results. 

Desire, wrath, greed, vanity, malice, self-assertion, 
jealousy, envy, are the terrible works of Force, its acti¬ 
vities in man; therefore this is the cause of bondage. 

Then enveloping is the power of Darkness, whereby 
a thing appears as something else; this is the cause of 
the circling birth and rebirth of the spirit, and the 
cause whereby extension is drawn forward. 

Though a man be full of knowledge, learned, skill¬ 
ful, very subtle-sighted, if Darkness has wrapped him 
round, he sees not, though he be full of manifold in¬ 
struction; he calls good that which is raised by error, 
and leans upon its properties, unlucky man that he is; 
great and hard to end is the enveloping power of Dark¬ 
ness. 

Wrong thinking, contradictory thinking, fanciful 
thinking, confused thinking — these are its workings; 
this power of extension never leaves hold of one who 
has come into contact with it, but perpetually sends 
him this way and that. 

Unwisdom, sluggishness, inertness, sloth, infatuation, 
folly, and things like these are of the potency of Dark¬ 
ness. Under the yoke of these he knows nothing at 
all, but remains as though asleep or like a post. 

But the potency of substance is pure like water, and 
even though mixed with the other two, it builds for the 
true refuge; for it is a reflected spark of the Self, and 
lights up the inert like the sun. 


24 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Of the potency of Substance when mixed the proper¬ 
ties are self-respect, self-restraint, control, faith and 
love and the longing to be free, a godlike power and a 
turning back from the unreal. 

Of the potency of substance altogether pure the prop¬ 
erties are grace, direct perception of the Self, and per¬ 
fect peace; exulting gladness, a resting on the Self 
supreme, whereby he reaches the essence of real bliss. 

The unmanifest is characterized by these three po¬ 
tencies; it is the causal vesture of the Self; dreamless 
life is the mode where it lives freely, all the activities 
of the powers, and even of the knowing soul having 
sunk back into it. 

Every form of outward perceiving has come to rest, 
the knowing soul becomes latent in the Self from which 
it springs; the name of this is dreamless life, wherein 
he says “I know nothing at all of the noise of the mov¬ 
ing world.” 

The body, powers, life-breaths, mind, self-assertion, 
all changes, sensuous things, happiness, unhappiness, 
the ether and all the elements, the whole world up to 
the unmanifest — this is not Self. 

Glamor and every work of glamor from the world- 
soul to the body, know this as unreal, as not the Self, 
built up of the mirage of the desert. 

But I shall declare to you the own being of the Self 
supreme, knowing which a man, freed from his bonds, 
reaches the lonely purity. 

There is a certain selfhood wherein the sense of “I” 
forever rests; who witnesses the three modes of being, 
who is other than the five veils; who is the only knower 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 


25 


in waking, dreaming, dreamlessness; of all the activi¬ 
ties of the knowing soul, whether good or bad — this 
is the “I”; 

Who of himself beholds all; whom none beholds; 
who kindles to consciousness the knowing soul and all 
the powers; whom none kindles to consciousness; by 
whom all this is filled; whom no other fdls; who is the 
shining light within this all; after whose shining all 
else shines; 

By whose nearness only body and powers and mind 
and soul do their work each in his own field, as though 
sent by the Self; 

Because the own nature of this is eternal wakeful¬ 
ness, self-assertion, the body and all the powers, and 
happiness and unhappiness are beheld by it, just as an 
earthen pot is beheld. This inner Self, the ancient 
Spirit, is everlasting, partless, immediately experienced 
happiness; ever of one nature, pure waking knowledge, 
sent forth by whom Voice and the life-breaths move. 

Here, verily, in the substantial Self, in the hidden 
place of the soul, this steady shining begins to shine like 
the dawn; then the shining shines forth as the noonday 
sun, making all this world to shine by its inherent light; 
knower of all the changing moods of mind and inward 
powers; of all the acts done by body, powers, life- 
breaths; present in them as fire in iron, strives not nor 
changes at all. 

This is not born nor dies nor grows, nor does it fade 
or change forever; even when this form has melted 
away, it no more melts than the air in a jar. 

Alike stranger to forming and deforming; of its own 


26 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


being, pure wakefulness; both being and non-being is 
this, besides it there is nothing else; this shines un¬ 
changing, this Supreme Self gleams in waking, dream 
and dreamlessness as “I,” present as the witness of the 
knowing soul. 

Bondage and Freedom 
(Verses 136 — 153) 

Then, holding firmly mind, with knowing soul at rest, 
know your self within yourself face to face saying, 
“This am I.” The life-ocean, whose waves are birth 
and dying, is shoreless; cross over it, fulfilling the end 
of being, resting firm in the Eternal. 

Thinking things not self are “I” — this is bondage 
for a man; this, arising from unwisdom, is the cause of 
falling into the weariness of birth and dying; this is 
the cause that he feeds and anoints and guards this 
form, thinking it the Self; the unreal, real; wrapping 
himself in sensuous things as a silk-worm in his own 
threads. 

The thought that what is not That is That grows up 
in the fool through darkness; because no discernment 
is there, it wells up, as the thought that a rope is a 
snake; thereupon a mighty multitude of fatuities fall 
on him who accepts this error, for he who grasps the 
unreal is bound; mark this, my companion. 

By the power of wakefulness, partless, external, sec- 
ondless, the Self wells up with its endless lordship; but 
this enveloping power wraps it round, born of Dark¬ 
ness, as the dragon of eclipse envelops the rayed sun. 

When the real Self with its stainless light recedes, a 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 


27 


man thinking “this body is I,” calls it the Self; then 
by lust and hate and all the potencies of bondage, the 
great power of Force that they call extension greatly 
afflicts him. 

Torn by the gnawing of the toothed beast of great 
delusion; wandered from the Self, accepting every 
changing mood of mind as himself, through this po¬ 
tency, in the shoreless ocean of birth and death, full 
of the poison of sensuous things, sinking and rising, he 
wanders, mean-minded, despicable-minded. 

As a line of clouds, born of the sun’s strong shining, 
expands before the sun and hides it from sight, so self- 
assertion, that has come into being through the Self, 
expands before the Self and hides it from sight. As 
when on an evil day the lord of day is swallowed up in 
thick, dark clouds, an ice-cold hurricane of wind, very 
terrible, afflicts the clouds in turns; so when the Self 
is enveloped in impenetrable Darkness, the keen power 
of extension drives with many afflictions the man whose 
soul is deluded. 

From those two powers a man’s bondage comes; de¬ 
luded by them he errs, thinking the body is the Self. 

Of the plant of birth and death, the seed is Darkness, 
the sprout is the thought that body is Self, the shoot 
is rage, the sap is deeds, the body is the stem, the life- 
breaths are the branches, the tops are the bodily powers, 
sensuous things are the flowers, sorrow is the fruit, born 
of varied deeds and manifold; and the Life is the bird 
that eats the fruit. 

This bondage to what is not Self, rooted in unwisdom, 
innate, made manifest without beginning or end, gives 


28 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


life to the falling torrent of sorrow, of birth and death, 
of sickness and old age. 

Not by weapons nor arms, not by storm nor fire nor 
by a myriad deeds can this be cut off, without the 
sword of discernment and knowledge, very sharp and 
bright, through the grace of the guiding power. 

He who is single-minded, fixed on the word divine, 
his steadfast fulfilment of duty will make the knowing 
soul within him pure; to him whose knowing soul is 
pure, a knowing of the Self supreme shall come; and 
through this knowledge of the Self supreme he shall 
destroy this circle of birth and death and its root to¬ 
gether. 

The Freeing of the Self 
(Verses 148 — 154) 

The Self, wrapped up in the five vestures beginning 
with the vesture formed of food, which are brought into 
being by its own power, does not shine forth, as the 
water in the pond, covered by a veil of green scum. 

When the green scum is taken away, immediately the 
water shines forth pure, taking away thirst and heat, 
straightway becoming a source of great joy to man. 

When the five vestures have been stripped off, the 
Self shines forth pure, the one essence of eternal bliss, 
beheld within, supreme, self-luminous. 

Discernment is to be made between the Self and what 
is not Self by the wise man seeking freedom from bond¬ 
age; through this he enters into joy, knowing the Self 
which is being, consciousness, bliss. 

As the reed from the tiger grass, so separating from 
the congeries of things visible the hidden Self within, 


29 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 

which is detached, not involved in actions, and dissolv¬ 
ing all in the Self, he who stands thus, has attained 
liberation. 

The Vesture formed of Food 
(Verses 154 — 164) 

The food-formed vesture is this body, which comes 
into being through food, which lives by food, which 
perishes without food. 

It is formed of cuticle, skin, flesh, blood, bone, water; 
this is not worthy to be the Self, eternally pure. 

The Self was before birth or death, and now is; how 
can it be born for the moment, fleeting, unstable of na¬ 
ture, not unified, inert, beheld like a jar? For the Self 
is the witness of all changes of form. 

The body has hands and feet, not the Self; though 
bodiless, yet because it is the Life, because its power is 
indestructible, it is controller, not controlled. 

Since the Self is witness of the body, its character, its 
acts, its states, therefore the Self must be of other na¬ 
ture than the body. 

A mass of wretchedness, clad in flesh, full of impu¬ 
rity and evil, how can this body be the knower? The 
Self is of other nature. 

Of this compound of skin, flesh, fat, bone and water, 
the man of deluded mind thinks, “This is I”; but he 
who is possessed of judgment knows that his true Self 
is of other character, is nature transcendental. 

The mind of the dullard thinks of the body, “This 
is I”; he who is more learned thinks, “This is I,” of the 
body and the separate self; but he who has attained 


30 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 

discernment and is wise knows the true Self saying, “I 
am the Eternal.” 

Therefore, O thou of mind deluded, put away the 
thought that this body is the Self, this compound of 
skin, flesh, fat, bone and water; discern the universal 
Self, the Eternal, changeless, and enjoy supreme peace. 

So long as the man of learning abandons not the 
thought, founded on delusion, that “This is I,” regard¬ 
ing the unenduring body and its powers, so long there 
is no hope for his liberation, though he possess the 
knowledge of the Vedanta and its sciences. 

As thou hast no thought that “This is the Self,” re¬ 
garding the body’s shadow, or the reflected form, or the 
body seen in dream, or the shape imagined in the mind, 
so let not this thought exist regarding the living body. 

The thought that the body is the Self, in the minds of 
men who discern not the real, is the seed from which 
spring birth and death and sorrow; therefore slay thou 
this thought with strong effort, for when thou hast 
abandoned this thought the longing for rebirth will 
cease. 

The Vesture formed of Vital Breath 
(V erses 165 — 166) 

The breath-formed vesture is formed by the life- 
breath determined by the five powers of action; through 
its power the food-formed vesture, guided by the Self 
and sustained by food, moves in all bodily acts. 

Nor is this breath-formed vesture the Self, since it 
is formed of the vital airs, coming and going like the 
wind, moving within and without; since it can in no 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 3 1 

wise discern between right and wrong, between oneself 
and another, but is ever dependent. 

The Vesture formed of Mind 
(Verses 167 — 183) 

The mind-formed vesture is formed of the powers of 
perception and the mind; it is the cause of the distinc¬ 
tion between the notions of “mine” and “I”; it is ac¬ 
tive in making a distinction of names and numbers; as 
more potent, it pervades and dominates the former 
vesture. 

The fire of the mind-formed vesture, fed by the five 
powers of perception, as though by five sacrificial 
priests, with objects of sense like streams of melted 
butter, blazing with the fuel of manifold sense-impres¬ 
sions, sets the personality aflame. 

For there is no unwisdom, except in the mind, for 
the mind is unwisdom, the cause of the bondage to life; 
when this is destroyed, all is destroyed; when this 
dominates, the world dominates. 

In dream, devoid of substance, it emanates a world 
of experiencer and things experienced, which is all 
mind; so in waking consciousness, there is no difference, 
it is all the domination of the mind. 

During the time of dreamlessness, when mind has 
become latent, nothing at all of manifestation remains; 
therefore man’s circle of birth and death is built by 
mind, and has no permanent reality. 

By the wind a cloud is collected, by the wind it is 
driven away again; by mind bondage is built up, by 
mind is built also liberation. 


32 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Building up desire for the body and all objects, it 
binds the man thereby as an ox by a cord; afterwards 
leading him to turn from them like poison, that same 
mind, verily, sets him free from bondage. 

Therefore mind is the cause of man’s bondage, and 
in turn of his liberation; when darkened by the powers 
of passion it is the cause of bondage, and when pure of 
passion and darkness it is the cause of liberation. 

Where discernment and dispassion are dominant, 
gaining purity, the mind makes for liberation; there¬ 
fore let the wise man who seeks liberation strengthen 
these two in himself as the first step. 

Mind is the name of the mighty tiger that hunts in 
the forest glades of sensuous things; let not the wise 
go thither, who seek liberation. 

Mind moulds all sensuous things through the earthly 
body and the subtle body of him who experiences; 
mind ceaselessly shapes the differences of body, of 
color, of condition, of race, as fruits caused by the acts 
of the potencies. 

Mind, beclouding the detached, pure consciousness, 
binding it with the cords of the body, the powers, the 
life-breaths, as “I” and “my,” ceaselessly strays among 
the fruits of experience caused by its own activities. 

Man’s circle of birth and death comes through the 
fault of attributing reality to the unreal, but this false 
attribution is built up by mind; this is the effective 
cause of birth and death and sorrow for him who has 
the faults of passion and darkness and is without dis¬ 
cernment. 

Therefore the wise who know the truth have declared 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 


33 


that mind is unwisdom, through which the whole 
world, verily, is swept about, as cloud belts by the wind. 

Therefore purification of the mind should be under¬ 
taken with strong effort by him who seeks liberation; 
when the mind has been purified, liberation comes like 
fruit into his hand. 

Through the sole power of liberation uprooting de¬ 
sire for sensuous things, and ridding himself of all 
bondage to works, he who through faith in the Real 
stands firm in the teaching, shakes off the very essence 
of passion from the understanding. 

The mind-formed vesture cannot be the higher Self, 
since it has beginning and end, waxing and waning; 
by causing sensuous things, it is the very essence of 
pain; that which is itself seen cannot be the Seer. 

The Vesture formed of Intelligence 
(V erses 184 — 197) 

The intelligence, together with the powers of intel¬ 
ligence, makes the intelligence-formed vesture, whose 
distinguishing character is actorship; it is the cause of 
man’s circle of birth and death. 

The power which is a reflected beam of pure Con¬ 
sciousness, called the understanding, is a mode of ab¬ 
stract Nature; it possesses wisdom and creative power; 
it thereby focuses the idea of “I” in the body and its 
powers. 

This “I,” beginningless in time, is the separate self, 
it is the initiator of all undertakings; this, impelled by 
previous imprints, works all works both holy and un¬ 
holy, and forms their fruits. 


34 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Passing through varying births it gains experience, 
now descending, now ascending; of this intelligence- 
formed vesture, waking, dream and dreamlessness are 
the fields where it experiences pleasure and pain. 

By constantly attributing to itself the body, state, 
condition, duties and works, thinking, “These are 
mine,” this intelligence-formed vesture, brightly shin¬ 
ing because it stands closest to the higher Self, becomes 
the vesture of the Self, and, thinking itself to be the 
Self, wanders in the circle of birth and death. 

This, formed of intelligence, is the light that shines 
in the vital breaths, in the heart; the Self who stands 
forever wears this vesture as actor and experiencer. 

The Self, assuming the limitation of the intelligence, 
self-deluded by the error of the intelligence, though it 
is the universal Self, yet views itself as separate from 
the Self; as the potter views the jars as separate from 
the clay. 

Through the force of its union with the vesture, the 
higher Self takes on the character of the vesture and 
assumes its nature, as fire, which is without form, takes 
on the varying forms of the iron, even though the Self 
is for ever by nature uniform and supreme. 

The Disciple Speaks 

Whether by delusion or otherwise, the higher Self ap¬ 
pears as the separate self; but, since the vesture is 
beginningless, there is no conceivable end of the begin¬ 
ningless. 

Therefore existence as the separate self must be 
eternal, nor can the circle of birth and death have an 


SELF, POTENCIES, VESTURES 3 S 

end; how then can there be liberation? Master, tell 
me this. 

The Master Answers 

Well hast thou asked, O wise one! Therefore rightly 
hear! A false imagination created by error is not con¬ 
clusive proof. 

Only through delusion can there be an association 
with objects, of that which is without attachment, with¬ 
out action, without form; it is like the association of 
blueness with the sky. 

The appearance as the separate self, of the Self, the 
Seer, who is without qualities, without form; essential 
wisdom and bliss, arises through the delusion of the 
understanding; it is not real; when the delusion passes, 
it exists no longer, having no substantial reality. 

Its existence, which is brought into being through 
false perception, because of delusion, lasts only so long 
as the error lasts; as the serpent in the rope endures 
only as long as the delusion; when the delusion ceases, 
there is no serpent. 


The Witness 


The Manifest and the Hidden Self 


(Verses 198 — 209) 


B eginningless is unwisdom, and all its works are 
too; but when wisdom is arisen, what belongs to 
unwisdom, although beginningless — 

Like a dream on waking, perishes, root and all; 
though beginningless, it is not endless; it is as some¬ 
thing that was not before, and now is, this is manifest. 

It is thus seen that, though without a beginning, un¬ 
wisdom comes to an end, just as something, which be¬ 
fore was not, conies into being. Built up in the Self 
by its being bound by disguise of intellect — 

Is this existence as the separate life, for there is no 
other than the Self, distinguished by its own nature, 
but the binding of the Self by the intellect is false, 
coming from unknowledge. 

This binding is untied by perfect knowledge, not 
otherwise; the discerning of the oneness of the Eternal 
and the Self is held by the scripture to be perfect knowl¬ 
edge. 

And this is accomplished by perfectly discerning 
between Self and not-self; thereafter discernment is to 
be gained between individual and universal Self. 

Water may be endlessly muddy, but when the mud is 
gone, the water is clear. As it shines, so shines the Self 
also, when faults are gone away, it shines forth clear. 

And when unreality ceases to exist in the individual 
self, it is clear that it returns towards the universal; 


THE WITNESS 37 

hence there is to be a rejection of the self-assertion and 
other characteristics of the individual self. 

Hence this higher Self is not what is called the intel¬ 
lectual veil, because that is changeful, helpless of itself, 
circumscribed, objective, liable to err; the non-eternal 
cannot be regarded as eternal. 

The bliss-formed veil is a form containing the reflec¬ 
tion of bliss — although it is tainted with darkness; it 
has the quality of pleasure, the attainment of well 
wished-for aims; it shines forth in the enjoyment of 
good works by a righteous man, of its own nature bliss- 
formed; gaining an excellent form, he enjoys bliss with¬ 
out effort. 

The principal sphere of the bliss-formed veil is in 
dreamless sleep; in dreaming and waking it is in part 
manifest when blissful objects are beheld. 

Nor is this bliss-formed veil the higher Self, for it 
wears a disguise, it is a form of objective nature; it is 
an effect caused by good acts, accumulated in this 
changeful form. 

When the five veils are taken away, according to in¬ 
ference and scripture, what remains after they are taken 
away is the Witness, in a form born of awakening. 

This is the Self, self-shining, distinguished from the 
five veils; this is the Witness in the three modes of 
perceiving, without change, without stain. The wise 
should know it as Being and Bliss, as his own Self. 

The Pupil said: 

(Verses 210 — 240) 

When the five veils are thus set aside through their 


38 


THE CREST-JEWEL OE WISDOM 


unreality, beyond the non-being of all I see nothing, 
Master; what then is to be known as anything by him 
who knows Self and not-self? 

The Master said: 

Truth has been spoken by thee, wise one; thou art 
skilled in judgment. Self-assertion and all these changes, 
— in the Self they have no being. That whereby all 
is enjoyed, but which is itself not enjoyed, know that 
to be the Self, the Knower, through thy very subtle 
intellect. 

Whatever is enjoyed by anyone, of that he is the wit¬ 
ness; but of that which is not enjoyed by anyone, it 
cannot be said that anyone is the witness. 

That is to be self-witness, where anything is enjoyed 
by itself; therefore the universal Self is witness of it¬ 
self; no other lesser thing is witness of it. 

In waking, dreaming, dreamlessness, that Self is 
clearly manifested, appearing through its universal 
form always as “I,” as the “I” within, uniformly. This 
is “I” beholding intellect and the rest that partake of 
varied forms and changes. It is manifest through 
eternal blissful self-consciousness; know that as the 
Self here in the heart. 

Looking at the reflection of the sun reflected in the 
water of a jar, he who is deluded thinks it is the sun, 
thus the reflected consciousness appearing under a dis¬ 
guise is thought by him who is hopelessly deluded to 
be “I.” 

Rejecting jar and water and the sun reflected there 
all together, the real sun is beheld. So the unchanging 


THE WITNESS 39 

One which is reflected in the three modes, self-shining, 
is perceived by the wise. 

Putting away in thought body and intellect as alike 
reflections of consciousness, discerning the seer, hid 
in the secret place, the Self, the partless awakening, 
the universal shining, distinguished alike from what 
exists and what does not exist; the eternal lord, all¬ 
present, very subtle, devoid of within and without, 
nothing but self; discerning this perfectly, in its own 
form, a man is sinless, passionless, deathless. 

Sorrowless, altogether bliss, full of wisdom, fearing 
nothing at all from anything; there is no other path of 
freedom from the bondage of the world but knowledge 
of the reality of his Self, for him who would be free. 

Knowledge that the Eternal is not divided from him 
is the cause of freedom from the world, whereby the 
Eternal, the secondless bliss, is gained by the awakened. 

Therefore one should perfectly know that the Eternal 
and the Self are not divided; for the wise who has be¬ 
come the Eternal does not return again to birth and 
death. 

The real, wisdom, the endless, the Eternal, pure, 
supreme, self-perfect, the one essence of eternal bliss, 
universal, undivided, unbroken — this he gains. 

This is the real, supreme, secondless, for besides the 
Self no other is; there is nothing else at all in the con¬ 
dition of perfect awakening to the reality of the su¬ 
preme being. 

This all, that is perceived as the vari-form world, 
from unknowledge, this all is the Eternal, when the 
mind’s confusion is cast away. 


40 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


The pot made of clay is not separate from the clay, 
for all through it is in its own nature clay; the form of 
the pot is not separate; whence then the pot? It is 
mere name, built up of illusion. 

By no one can the form of the pot be seen, separate 
from the clay; hence the pot is built of delusion, but 
the real thing is the clay, like the supreme Being. 

All this is always an effect of the real Eternal; it is 
that alone, nor is there anything else but that. He who 
says there is, is not free from delusion, like one who 
talks in his sleep. 

The Eternal verily is this all; thus says the excellent 
scripture of the Atharva. In accordance with it, all 
this is the Eternal only, nor is there any separate exist¬ 
ence of the attribute apart from the source. 

If this moving world were the real, then had the Self 
no freedom from limitation, divine authority no worth, 
the Master Self no truth; these three things the great- 
souled cannot allow. 

The Master who knows the reality of things de¬ 
clared: I verily am not contained in these things, nor 
do these creatures stand in me. If the world be real, 
then it should be apprehended in dreamless sleep; it 
is not apprehended there, therefore it is unreal, dream¬ 
like, false. Therefore the world is not separate from 
the higher Self; what is perceived as separate is false, 
— the natural potencies and the like; what real exist¬ 
ence is there in the attribute? Its support shines forth 
as ivith attributes illusively. 

Whatever is delusively perceived by one deluded, is 
the Eternal; the silver shining is only the pearl shell. 


THE WITNESS 41 

The Eternal is perpetually conceived as formed; but 
what is attributed to the Eternal is a name only. 

Therefore the supreme Eternal is Being, secondless, 
of the form of pure knowledge, stainless, peaceful, free 
from beginning or ending, changeless, its own-nature 
is unbroken bliss. 

Every difference made by world-glamor set aside, 
eternal, lasting, partless, measureless, formless, unmani¬ 
fest, nameless, unfading, a self-shining light that illu¬ 
minates all that is. 

Where the difference of knower, knowing, known is 
gone, endless, sure; absolute, partless, pure conscious¬ 
ness; the wise know this as the supreme reality. 

That can neither be left nor taken, is no object of 
mind or speech; immeasurable, beginningless, endless, 
the perfect Eternal, the universal “I.” 

That Thou Art 

(Verses 241 — 251) 

The Eternal and the Self, indicated by the two words 
“that” and “thou,” when clearly understood, according 
to the Scripture “That Thou Art,” are one; their one¬ 
ness is again ascertained. 

This identity of theirs is in their essential, not their 
verbal meanings, for they are apparently of contradic¬ 
tory character; likp the firefly and the sun, the sover¬ 
eign and the serf, the well and the great waters, the 
atom and Mount Meru. 

The contradiction between them is built up by their 
disguises, but this disguise is no real thing at all; the 
disguise of the Master Self is the world-glamor, the 


42 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


cause of the Celestial and other worlds; the disguise 
of the individual life is the group of five veils — hear 
this now: 

These are the two disguises, of the Supreme and the 
individual life; when they are set aside together, there 
is no longer the Supreme nor the individual life. The 
king has his kingdom, the warrior his weapons; when 
these are put away there is neither warrior nor king. 

According to the Scripture saying, “this is the instruc¬ 
tion, the Self is not that, not that,” the twofoldness that 
was built up sinks away of itself in the Eternal; let 
the truth of this scripture be grasped through awaken¬ 
ing; the putting away of the two disguises must verily 
be accomplished. 

It is not this, it is not this: because this is built up, 
it is not the real — like the serpent seen in the rope, 
or like a dream; thus putting away every visible thing 
by wise meditation, the oneness of the two — Self and 
Eternal — is then to be known. 

Therefore the two are to be well observed in their 
essential unity. Neither their contradictory character 
nor their non-contradictory character is all; but the 
real and essential Being is to be reached, in order to 
gain the essence in which they are one and undivided. 

When one says: “This man is Devadatta,” the one¬ 
ness is here stated by rejecting contradictory qualities. 
With the great word “That Thou Art,” it is the same; 
what is contradictory between the two is set aside. 

As being essentially pure consciousness, the oneness 
between the Real and the Self is known by the awak¬ 
ened; and by hundreds of great texts the oneness, the 


THE WITNESS 43 

absence of separateness, between the Eternal and the 
Self is declared. 

That is not the physical; it is the perfect, after the 
unreal is put aside; like the ether, not to be handled 
by thought. Hence this matter that is perceived is 
illusive, therefore set it aside; but what is grasped by 
its own selfhood — “that I am the Eternal” — know 
that with intelligence purified; know the Self as part¬ 
less awakening. 

Every pot and vessel has always clay as its cause, 
and its material is clay; just like this, this world is en¬ 
gendered by the Real, and has the Real as its Self, the 
Real is its material altogether. That Real than which 
there is none higher, that thou art, the restful, the 
stainless, secondless Eternal, the supreme. 

The Manifest and the Hidden Self 
(Verses 252 — 268) 

As dream-built lands and times, objects and knowers 
of them, are all unreal, just so here in waking is this 
world; its cause is ignorance of the Self; in as much as 
all this world, body and organs, vital breath and per¬ 
sonality are all unreal, in so much thou art that, the 
restful, the stainless, secondless Eternal, the supreme. 

Far away from birth and conduct, family and tribe, 
quite free from name and form and quality and fault; 
beyond space and time and objects — this is the Eter¬ 
nal, that thou art; become it in the Self. 

The supreme, that no word can reach, but that is 
reached by the eye of awakening, pure of stain, the pure 
reality of consciousness and mind together — this is 


44 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


the Eternal, that thou art; become it in the Self. 

Untouched by the six infirmities, reached in the heart 
of those that seek for union, reached not by the organs, 
whose being neither intellect nor reason knows — this 
is the Eternal, that thou art; become it in the Self. 

Built of error is the world; in That it rests; That 
rests in itself, different from the existent and the non¬ 
existent; partless, nor bound by causality, is the Eter¬ 
nal, that thou art; become it in the Self. 

Birth and growth, decline and loss, sickness and 
death it is free from, and unfading; the cause of emana¬ 
tion, preservation, destruction, is the Eternal, that 
thou art; become it in the Self. 

Where all difference is cast aside, all distinction is 
cast away, a waveless ocean, motionless; ever free, with 
undivided form — this is the Eternal, that thou art ; 
become it in the Self. 

Being one, though cause of many, the cause of others, 
with no cause itself; where cause and caused are 
merged in one, self-being, the Eternal, that thou art; 
become it in the Self. 

Free from doubt and change, great, unchanging; 
where changing and unchanging are merged in one 
Supreme; eternal, unfading joy, unstained — this is 
the Eternal, that thou art; become it in the Self. 

This shines forth manifold through error, through 
being the Self under name and form and quality and 
change; like gold itself unchanging ever — this is the 
Eternal, that thou art; become it in the Self. 

This shines out unchanging, higher than the highest, 
the hidden one essence, whose character is selfhood, 


THE WITNESS 


45 


reality, consciousness, joy, endless unfading — this 
is the Eternal, that thou art; become it in the Self. 

Let a man make it his own in the Self — like a word 
that is spoken, by reasoning from the known, by 
thought; this is as devoid of doubt as water in the hand, 
so certain will its reality become. 

Recognizing this perfectly illumined one, whose re¬ 
ality is altogether pure, as one recognizes the leader of 
men in the assembled army, and resting on that always, 
standing firm in one’s own Self, sink all this world that 
is born, into the Eternal. 

In the soul, in the hidden place, marked neither as 
what is nor what is not, is the Eternal, true, supreme, 
secondless. He who through the Self dwells here in 
the secret place, for him there is no coming forth again 
to the world of form. 

When the thing is well known even, this beginning¬ 
less mode of thought, “I am the doer and the enjoyer,” 
is very powerful; this mode of mind lasting strongly, 
is the cause of birth and rebirth. A looking backward 
toward the Self, a dwelling on it, is to be effortfully 
gained; freedom here on earth, say the saints, is the 
thinning away of that mode of thought. 

That thought of T and ‘mine’ in the flesh, the eye 
and the rest, that are not the Self — this transference 
from the real to the unreal is to be cast away by the 
wise man by steadfastness in his own Self. 


Finding the Real Self 

Bondage Through Imagination 
(Verses 269 — 276) 

n ecognizing as thine own the hidden Self, the wit- 

'■ ness of the soul and its activities, perceiving truly 
“That am I,” destroy the thought of Self in all not Self. 

Give up following after the world, give up following 
after the body, give up following after the ritual law; 
make an end of transferring selfhood to these. 

1 hrough a man’s imagination being full of the world, 
through his imagination being full of the ritual law, 
through his imagination being full of the body, wisdom, 
truly, is not born in him. 

I or him who seeks freedom from the grasping hand 
of birth and death, an iron fetter binding his feet, say 
they who know it, is this potent triad of imaginings; 
he who has got free from this enters into freedom. 

The scent of sandalwood that drives all evil odors 
away comes forth through stirring it with water and 
the like; all other odors are driven altogether away. 

The image of the supreme Self, stained by the dust 
of imaginings, dwelling inwardly, endless, evil, comes 
forth pure, by the stirring power of enlightenment, as 
the scent of the sandalwood comes forth clear. 

In the net of imaginings of things not Self, the image 
of the Self is held back; by resting on the eternal Self, 
their destruction comes, and the Self shines clear. 

As the mind rests more and more on the Self behind 


FINDING THE REAL SELF 


47 


it, it is more and more freed from outward imaginings; 
when imaginings are put away, and no residue left, he 
enters and becomes the Self, pure of all bonds. 

Selfhood Transferred to Things not Self 
(Verses 277 — 298) 

By resting ever in the Self, the restless mind of him 
who seeks union is stilled, and all imaginings fade away; 
therefore make an end of transferring Selfhood to 
things not Self. 

Darkness is put away through force and substantial 
being; force, through substantial being; in the pure, 
substantial being is not put away; therefore, relying 
on substantial being, make an end of transferring Self¬ 
hood to things not Self. 

The body of desire is nourished by all new works 
begun; steadily thinking on this, and effortfully hold¬ 
ing desire firm, make an end of transferring selfhood 
to things not Self. 

Thinking: “I am not this separate life but the su¬ 
preme Eternal,” beginning by rejecting all but this, 
make an end of transferring selfhood to things not 
Self; it comes from the swift impetus of imaginings. 

Understanding the all-selfhood of the Self, by learn¬ 
ing, seeking union, entering the Self, make an end of 
transferring selfhood to things not Self; it comes from 
the Self’s reflected light in other things. 

Neither in taking nor giving does the sage act at all; 
therefore by ever resting on the One, make an end of 
transferring selfhood to things not Self. 

Through sentences like “That thou art” awaking to 


48 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


the oneness of the Eternal and the Self, to confirm the 
Self in the Eternal, make an end of transferring self¬ 
hood to things not Self. 

While there yet lingers a residue undissolved of the 
thought that this body is the Self, carefully seeking 
union with the Self, make an end of transferring self¬ 
hood to things not Self. 

As long as the thought of separate life and the world 
shines, dreamlike even, so long incessantly, 0 wise one, 
make an end of transferring selfhood to things not Self. 

The body of desire, born of father and mother of 
impure elements, made up of fleshly things impure, is 
to be abandoned as one abandons an impure man afar; 
gain thy end by becoming the Eternal. 

The Real in Things Unreal 

As the space in a jar in uniyersal space, so the Self 
is to be merged without division in the Self supreme; 
rest thou ever thus, O sage. 

Through the separate self gaining the Self, self-shin¬ 
ing as a resting-place, let all outward things from a 
world-system to a lump of clay be abandoned, like a 
vessel of impure water. 

Raising the thought of “I” from the body to the 
Self that is Consciousness, Being, Bliss, and lodging it 
there, leave form, and become pure for ever. 

Knowing that “I am that Eternal” wherein this world 
is reflected, like a city in a mirror, thou shalt perfectly 
gain thy end. 

What is of real nature, self-formed, original con¬ 
sciousness, secondless bliss, formless, actless — enter- 


FINDING THE REAL SELF 


49 


ing that, let a man put off this false body of desires, 
worn by the Self as a player puts on a costume. 

For the Self, all that is seen is but mirage; it lasts 
but for a moment, we see, and know it is not “I”; how 
could “I know all” be said of the personal self that 
changes every moment? 

The real “I” is witness of the personal self and its 
powers; as its being is perceived always, even in dream¬ 
less sleep. The scripture says the Self is unborn, ever¬ 
lasting; this is the hidden Self, distinguished neither as 
what exists nor what has no existence. 

The beholder of every change in things that change, 
can be the unchanging alone; in the mind’s desires, in 
dreams, in dreamless sleep the insubstantial nature of 
things that change is clearly perceived again and again. 

Therefore put away the false selfhood of this fleshly 
body, for the false selfhood of the body is built up by 
thought; knowing the Self as thine own, unhurt by the 
three times, undivided illumination, enter into peace. 

Put away the false selfhood of family and race and 
name, of form and rank, for these dwell in this body; 
put away the actorhood and other powers of the body 
of form; become the Self whose self is partless joy. 

Other bonds of man are seen, causes of birth and 
death, but the root and first form of them is selfishness. 


Tke Power of Mind-Images 


(Verses 299 — 378) 


3 long as the Self is in bondage to the false personal 



self of evil, so long is there not even a possibility 
of freedom, for these two are contraries. 

But when free from the grasp of selfish personality, 
he reaches his real nature; Bliss and Being shine forth 
by their own light, like the full moon, free from black¬ 
ness. 

But he who in the body thinks “this am I,” a delu¬ 
sion built up by the mind through darkness; when this 
delusion is destroyed for him without remainder, there 
arises for him the realization of Self as the Eternal, 
free from all bondage. 

The treasure of the bliss of the Eternal is guarded by 
the terrible serpent of personality, very powerful, en¬ 
veloping the Self, with three fierce heads — the three 
nature-powers; cutting off these three heads with the 
great sword of discernment, guided by the divine teach¬ 
ings, and destroying the serpent, the wise man may 
enter into that joy-bringing treasure. 

So long as there is even a trace of the taint of poison 
in the body, how can there be freedom from sickness? 
In just the same way, there is no freedom for him who 
seeks union, while selfishness endures. 

When the false self ceases utterly, and the motions 
of the mind caused by it come to an end, then, by dis¬ 
cerning the hidden Self, the real truth that “I am that” 
is found. 


THE TOWER OF MIND-IMAGES 


51 


Give up at once the thought of “I” in the action of 
the selfish personality, in the changeful self, which is 
but a reflection of the real Self, destroying rest in the 
Self; from falsely attributing reality to which are in¬ 
curred birth and death and old age, fruitful in sorrow, 
the pilgrimage of the soul; but reality belongs to the 
hidden Self, whose form is consciousness, whose body 
is bliss; whose nature is ever one, the conscious Self, 
the Master, whose form is Bliss, whose glory is un¬ 
speakable; there is no cause of the souks pilgrimage 
but the attribution of the reality of this to the selfish 
personality. 

Therefore this selfish personality, the enemy of the 
Self, like a thorn in the throat of the eater, being cut 
away by the great sword of knowledge, thou shalt en¬ 
joy the bliss of the Self’s sovereignty, according to thy 
desire. 

Therefore bringing to an end the activity of the selfish 
personality, all passion being laid aside when the su¬ 
preme object is gained, rest silent, enjoying the bliss of 
the Self, in the Eternal, through the perfect Self, from 
all doubt free. 

Mighty selfishness, even though cut down root and 
all, if brought to life again even for a moment, in 
thought, causes a hundred dissipations of energy, as a 
cloud shaken by the wind in the rainy seasons, pours 
forth its floods. 

After seizing the enemy, selfishness, no respite at all 
is to be given to it, by thoughts of sensual objects. Just 
this is the cause of its coming to life again, as water 
is of the lime tree that had withered away. [310] 


52 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


The desirer is constituted by the bodily self; how 
can the cause of desire be different? Hence the motion 
of enticement to sensual objects is the cause of world- 
bondage, through attachment to what is other than 
Self. 

From increase of action, it is seen that the seed of 
bondage is energized; when action is destroyed, the 
seed is destroyed. Hence let him check sensual action. 

From the growth of mind-images comes the action; 
from action the mind-image grows; hence the man’s 
pilgrimage ceases not. 

To cut the bonds of the world’s pilgrimage, both must 
be burned away by the ascetic. And the growth of 
mind-images comes from these two — imagining and 
external action. 

Growing from these two, it brings forth the pilgrim¬ 
age of the soul. The way of destroying these three in 
every mode of consciousness, should be constantly 
sought. 

By looking on all as the Eternal, everywhere, in 
every way, and by strengthening the mind-image of real 
being, this triad comes to melt away. 

In the destruction of actions will arise the destruc¬ 
tion of imaginings, and from this the dispersal of mind- 
images. The thorough dispersal of mind-images is 
freedom; this is called freedom even in life. 

When the mind-image of the real grows up, in the 
dispersal of the mind’s alarms, and the mind-image of 
the selfish personality melts away, as even thick dark¬ 
ness is quickly melted away before the light of the sun. 

The action of the greatest darkness, the snare of 


THE POWER OF MIND-IMAGES 


S3 


unreality, is no longer seen when the lord of day is 
arisen; so in the shining of the essence of secondless 
bliss, no bond exists nor scent of sorrow. 

Transcending every visible object of sense, fixing 
the mind on pure being, the totality of bliss, with right 
intentness within and without, pass the time while the 
bonds of action last. [320] 

Wavering in reliance on the Eternal must never be 
allowed; wavering is death — thus said the son of the 
Evolver. 

There is no other danger for him who knows, but 
this wavering as to the Self’s real nature. Thence arises 
delusion, and thence selfish personality; thence comes 
bondage, and therefrom sorrow. 

Through beholding sensual objects, forgetfulness be¬ 
wilders a wise man even, as a woman her favorite lover. 

As sedge pushed back does not remain even for a 
moment, just in the same way does the world-glamor 
close over a wise man, who looks away from the Real. 

If the imagination falling even a little from its aim, 
towards outward objects, it falls on and on, through un¬ 
steadiness, like a player’s fallen on a row of steps. 

If the thought enters into sensual objects, it becomes 
intent on their qualities; from this intentness immedi¬ 
ately arises desire, and, from desire, every action of 
man. 

Hence than this wavering there is no worse death, 
for one who has gained discernment, who has beheld 
the Eternal in spiritual concentration. By right intent¬ 
ness he at once gains success; be thou intent on the 
Self, with all carefulness. 


54 


TI-IE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Then comes loss of knowledge of one’s real being, 
and he who has lost it falls; and destruction of him who 
thus falls is seen, but not restoration. 

Let him put away the wilful motions of the mind, 
the cause of every evil act; he who has unity in life, 
has unity after his body is gone. The scripture of 
sentences says that he who beholds difference has fear. 

Whenever even a wise man beholds difference in the 
endless Eternal, though only as much as an atom, what 
he beholds through wavering becomes a fear to him 
through its difference. [330] 

All scripture, tradition and logic disregarding, who¬ 
ever makes the thought of self in visible things, falls 
upon sorrow after sorrow; thus disregarding, he is like 
a thief in darkness. 

He whose delight is attachment to the real, freed, he 
gains the greatness of the Self, eternal; but he who de¬ 
lights in attachment to the false, perishes; this is seen 
in the case of the thief and him who is no thief. 

The ascetic, who has put away the cause of bondage 
— attachment to the unreal — stands in the vision of 
the Self, saying, “this Self am I”; this resting in the Eter¬ 
nal, brings joy by experiencing it, and takes away the 
supreme sorrow that we feel, whose cause is unwisdom. 

Attachment to the outward brings as its fruit the 
perpetual increase of evil mind-images. Knowing this 
and putting away outward things by discernment, let 
him place his attachment in the Self forever. 

When the outward is checked, there is restfulness 
from emotion; when emotion is at rest, there is vision 
of the supreme Self. When the Self is seen, the bond- 


THE POWER OF MIND-IMAGES 55 

age of the world is destroyed; the checking of the out¬ 
ward is the path of freedom. 

Who, being learned, discerning between real and un¬ 
real, knowing the teaching of the scripture, and behold¬ 
ing the supreme object with understanding, would place 
his reliance on the unreal, even though longing to be 
free — like a child, compassing his own destruction. 

There is no freedom for him who is full of attach¬ 
ment to the body and its like; for him who is free, there 
is no wish for the body and its like; the dreamer is not 
awake, he who is awake dreams not; for these things 
are the opposites of each other. 

Knowing the Self as within and without, in things 
stable and moving — discerning this through the Self, 
through its comprehending all things — putting off 
every disguise, and recognizing no division, standing 
firm through the perfect Self — such a one is free. 

Through the All-self comes the cause of freedom from 
bondage; than the being of the All-self there is no other 
cause; and this arises when there is no grasping after 
the outer; he gains the being of the All-self by perpetu¬ 
ally resting on the Self. 

How should cessation of grasping after the outer not 
fail for him who, through the bodily self remains with 
mind attached to enjoyment of outward objects, and 
thus engages in action. It can only be effortfully ac¬ 
complished by those who have renounced the sensual 
aims of all acts and rites, who are perfected in resting 
on the eternal Self, who know reality, who long for 
reality and bliss in the Self. [340] 

The scripture that speaks of “him who is at peace, 


56 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


controlled/’ teaches the ecstasy of the ascetic, whose 
work is the study of wisdom, to the end of gaining the 
All-self. 

The destruction of personality which has risen up in 
power cannot be done at once, even by the learned, 
except those who are immovably fixed in the ecstasy 
which no doubt can assail, for the mind-images are of 
endless rebirth. 

Binding a man with the delusion of belief in his per¬ 
sonality, through the power that veils, the power that 
propels casts him forth, through its potencies. 

The victory over this compelling power cannot be 
accomplished, until the power that veils has come to 
cessation with residue. The power that veils is, through 
the force of its own nature, destroyed, when the seer 
is discerned from what is seen, as milk is distinguished 
from water. 

Perfect discernment, born of clear awakening, arises 
free from doubt, and pure of all bondage, where there 
is no propelling power towards delusive objects, once 
the division is made between the real natures of the 
seer and what is seen; he cuts the bonds of delusion 
that glamor makes, and, after that, there is no more pil¬ 
grimage for the free. 

The flame of discernment of the oneness of the higher 
and the lower, burns up the forest of unwisdom utterly. 
What seed of the soul’s pilgrimage can there be for him 
who has gained being in which there is no duality? 

And the cessation of the veiling power arises from 
perfect knowledge; the destruction of false knowledge 


THE POWER OF MIND-IMAGES 57 

is the cessation of the pain engendered by the propelling 
power. 

The triple error is understood by knowing the real 
nature of the rope; therefore the reality of things is 
to be known by the wise to the end of freedom from 
bondage. 

As iron from union with fire, so, from union with 
the real, thought expands as material things; hence the 
triple effect of this, seen in delusion, dream, desire, is 
but a mirage. 

Thence come all changing forms in nature beginning 
with personality and ending with the body, and all sen¬ 
sual objects; these are unreal, because subject to change 
every moment; but the Self never changes. [350] 

Consciousness, eternal, non-dual, partless, uniform, 
witness of intellect and the rest, different from existent 
and non-existent; its real meaning is the idea of “I”; 
a union of being and bliss — this is the higher Self. 

He who thus understands, discerning the real from 
the unreal, ascertaining realit}^ by his own awakened 
vision, knowing his own Self as partless awakening, 
freed from these things reaches peace in the Self. 

Then melts the heart’s knot of unwisdom without 
residue, when, through the ecstasy in which there is no 
doubt, arises the vision of the non-dual Self. 

Through the mind’s fault are built the thoughts of 
thou and I and this, in the supreme Self which is non¬ 
dual, and beyond which there is nothing; but when 
ecstasy is reached, all his doubts melt away through 
apprehension of the real. 

Peaceful, controlled, possessing the supreme cessa- 


58 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


tion, perfect in endurance, entering into lasting ecstasy, 
the ascetic makes the being of the All-self his own; 
thereby burning up perfectly the doubts that are born of 
the darkness of unwisdom, he dwells in bliss in the form 
of the Eternal, without deed or doubt. 

They who rest on the Self that is consciousness, who 
have put away the outward, the imaginations of the ear 
and senses, and selfish personality, they, verily, are free 
from the bonds and snares of the world, but not they 
who only meditate on what others have seen. 

The Self is divided by the division of its disguises; 
when the disguises are removed, the Self is lonely and 
pure; hence let the wise man work for the removal of 
the disguises by resting in the ecstasy that is free from 
doubt. 

Attracted by the Self the man goes to the being of 
the Self by resting on it alone; the grub, thinking on 
the bee, builds up the nature of the bee. 

The grub, throwing off attachment to other forms, 
and thinking intently on the bee, takes on the nature 
of the bee; even thus he who seeks for union, thinking 
intently on the reality of the supreme Self, perfectly 
enters that Self, resting on it alone. 

Very subtle, as it were, is the reality of the supreme 
Self, nor can it be reached by gross vision; by the ex¬ 
ceedingly subtle state of ecstasy it is to be known by 
those who are worthy, whose minds are altogether 
pure. [360] 

As gold purified in the furnace, rids itself of dross 
and reaches the quality of its own self, so the mind 


TIIE POWER OF MIND-IMAGES 59 

ridding itself of the dross of substance, force and dark¬ 
ness, through meditation, enters into reality. 

When purified by the power of uninterrupted intent¬ 
ness, the mind is thus melted in the Eternal, then ec¬ 
stasy is purified of all doubt, and of itself enjoys the 
essence of secondless bliss. 

Through this ecstasy comes destruction of the knot 
of accumulated mind-images, destruction of all works; 
within and without, for ever and altogether, the form 
of the Self becomes manifest, without any effort at all. 

Let him know that thinking is a hundred times better 
than scripture; that concentration, thinking the matter 
out, is a hundred thousand times better than thinking; 
that ecstasy free from doubt is endlessly better than 
concentration. 

Through unwavering ecstasy is clearly understood 
the reality of the Eternal, fixed and sure. This cannot 
be when other thoughts are confused with it, by the 
motions of the mind. 

Therefore with powers of sense controlled enter in 
ecstasy into the hidden Self, with mind at peace per¬ 
petually; destroy the darkness made by beginningless 
unwisdom, through the clear view of the oneness of the 
real. 

The first door of union is the checking of voice, the 
cessation of grasping, freedom from expectation and 
longing, the character bent ever on the one end. 

A centering of the mind on the one end, is the cause 
of the cessation of sensuality; control is the cause that 
puts an end to imaginings; by peace, the mind-image 
of the personality is melted away; from this arises un- 


60 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


shaken enjoyment of the essence of bliss in the Eternal 
for ever, for him who seeks union; therefore the check¬ 
ing of the imagination is ever to be practiced effort- 
fully, O ascetic! 

Hold voice in the self, hold the self in intellect, hold 
intellect in the witness of intellect, and, merging the 
witness in the perfect Self, enjoy supreme peace. 

The seeker for union shares the nature of each dis¬ 
guise — body, vital breath, sense, mind, intellect — 
when his thoughts are fixed on that disguise. [370] 

When he ceases from this sharing, the ascetic reaches 
perfect cessation and happiness, and is plunged in the 
essence of Being and Bliss. 

Renouncing inwardly, renouncing outwardly — this 
is possible only for him who is free from passion; and 
he who is free from passion renounces all attachment 
within and without, through the longing for freedom. 

Outward attachment arises through sensual objects; 
inward attachment, through personality. Only he who, 
resting in the Eternal, is free from passion, is able to 
give them up. Freedom from passion and awakening 
are the wings of the spirit. O wise man, understand 
these two wings! For without them you cannot rise 
to the crown of the tree of life. 

Soul-vision belongs to him who is free from passion; 
steady inspiration belongs to the soul-seer. Freedom 
from bondage belongs to the reality of inspiration; 
enjoyment of perpetual bliss belongs to the Self that 
is free. 

I see no engenderer of happiness greater than free¬ 
dom from passion for him who is self-controlled; if 


61 


THE POWER OF MIND-IMAGES 

very pure inspiration of the Self be joined to it, he 
enters into the sovereignty of self-dominion. This is 
the door of young freedom everlasting. There do thou 
ever fix thy consciousness on the real self, in all ways 
free from attachment to what is other than this, for 
the sake of the better way. 

Cut off all hope in sensual objects which are like 
poison, the cause of death; abandon all fancies of birth 
and family and social state; put all ritual actions fai 
away; renounce the illusion of self-dwelling in the body, 
center the consciousness on the Self. Thou art the 
seer, thou art the stainless, thou art in truth the su¬ 
preme, secondless Eternal. 

Firmly fixing the mind on the goal, the Eternal, 
keeping the outward senses in their own place, with 
form unmoved, heedless of the body’s state, entering 
into the oneness of Self and Eternal by assimilating the 
Self and rising above all differences, for ever drink the 
essence of the bliss of the Eternal in the Self. What 
profit is there in other things that give no joy? [378] 


Free Even in Life 

(Verses 379 — 438) 

easing to feed the imagination on things not Self, 
^ full of darkness, causing sorrow, bend the imagina¬ 
tion on the Self, whose form is bliss, the cause of free¬ 
dom. 

This is the self luminous, witness of all, ever shining 
through the veil of the soul; making the one aim this 
Self, that is the contrary of all things unreal, realize it 
by identification with its partless nature. 

Naming this from its undivided being, its freedom 
from all other tendency, let him know it clearly from 
being of the own nature of Self. 

Firmly realizing self-hood in that, abandoning self¬ 
hood in the selfish personality, stand towards it as a 
disinterested onlooker stands towards the fragments 
of a broken vase. 

Entering the purified inner organ into the witness 
whose nature is the Self, who is pure awakening, lead¬ 
ing upward step by step to unmoving firmness, let him 
then gain vision of perfection. 

Let him gain vision of the Self, freed from all dis¬ 
guises built up by ignorance of the Self — body, senses, 
vitality, emotion, personality — the Self whose nature 
is partless and perfect like universal ether. 

Fhe ether, freed from its hundred disguises — water- 
pots, jars, corn-measures and the like — is one and 
not divided, thus also the pure supreme, freed from 
personality, is one. 


FREE EVEN IN LIFE 


63 


All disguises beginning with the Evolver and ending 
with a log are mirage only; therefore let him behold his 
own perfect Self, standing in the Self’s oneness. 

Whatever by error is built up as different from that, 
is in reality that only, not different from that. When 
the error is destroyed, the reality of the snake that was 
seen shines forth as the rope; thus the own-nature of 
all is the Self. 

The Evolver is the Self, the Pervader is the Self, the 
Sky-lord is the Self, the Destroyer is the Self; all this 
universe is the Self; there is nothing but the Self. 

Inward is the Self, outward also is the Self; the Self 
is to the east, the Self is also to the west. The Self is 
to the south, the Self is also to the north. The Self is 
above, the Self is beneath. 

Just as wave and foam, eddy and bubble are in 
their own nature water; so, from the body to the per¬ 
sonality, all is consciousness, the pure essence of con¬ 
sciousness. [390] 

Being verily is all this world, that is known of voice 
and mind, there is nothing else than Being, standing 
on nature’s other shore. Are cup and water-pot and 
jar anything but earth? He who is deluded by the 
wine of glamor speaks of “thou” and “I.” 

“When by repeated effort naught remains but this,” 
the scripture says, declaring absence of duality, to put 
an end to false transference of reality. 

Like the ether, free from darkness, free from waver¬ 
ing, free from limits, free from motion, free from change; 
having neither a within nor a without, having no other 


64 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


than it, having no second, is the Self, the supreme 
Eternal; what else is there to be known? 

What more is there to be said? The Eternal, the 
Life, the Self is seen here under many forms; all in this 
world is the Eternal, the secondless Eternal; the scrip¬ 
ture says “I am the Eternal”; knowing this clearly, 
those whose minds are awakened, who have abandoned 
the outward, becoming the Eternal, dwell in the Self, 
which is extending consciousness and bliss. This, verily, 
is sure. 

Kill out desire that springs up through thought of 
self in the body formed of darkness, then violent pas¬ 
sion in the formal body woven of the breath. Knowing 
the Self whose fame is sung in the hymns, who is eternal 
and formed of bliss, stand in the being of the Eternal. 

As long as the son of man enjoys this body of death, 
he is impure; from the enemies arises the weariness 
that dwells in birth and death and sickness. When he 
knows the pure Self of benign form, immovable, then 
he is free from these; — thus says the scripture too. 

When all delusive qualities attributed to the Self are 
put away, the Self is the supreme eternal, perfect, sec¬ 
ondless, changeless. 

When the activity of the imagination comes to rest 
in the higher Self, the Eternal that wavers not, then no 
more wavering is seen, and vain words only remain. 

The belief in this world is built up of unreality. In 
the one substance, changeless, formless, undifferenti¬ 
ated, what separateness can exist? 

In the one substance, in which no difference of seer, 
seeing, seen, exists, which is changeless, formless, un- 


FREE EVEN IN LIFE 


65 


differentiated, what separateness can exist? [400] 

In the one substance, like the world-ocean full to 
overflowing, changeless, formless, undifferentiated, 
whence can separateness come? 

Where the cause of delusion melts away, like dark¬ 
ness in light, in the secondless, supreme reality, un¬ 
differentiated, what separateness can there be? 

In the supreme reality, the very Self of oneness, how 
could any word of difference dwell? By whom is dif¬ 
ference perceived in purely blissful dreamlessness? 

For this world no longer is, whether past, present, or 
to come, after awakening to the supreme reality, in the 
real Self, the Eternal, from all wavering free. The 
snake seen in the rope exists not, nor even a drop of 
water in the desert mirage, where the deer thirsts. 

This duality is mere glamor, for the supreme reality 
is not twofold; thus the scripture says, and it is directly 
experienced in dreamlessness. 

By the learned it has been perceived that the thing 
attributed has no existence apart from the substance, 
as in the case of the serpent and the rope. The dis¬ 
tinction comes to life through delusion. 

This distinction has its root in imagining; when ima¬ 
gining ceases it is no more. Therefore bring imagin¬ 
ing to rest in the higher Self whose form is concealed. 

In soul-vision the wise man perceives in his heart a 
certain wide-extending awakening, whose form is pure 
bliss, incomparable, the other shore, for ever free, where 
is no desire, limitless as the ether, partless, from waver¬ 
ing free, the perfect Eternal. 

In soul-vision the wise man perceives in his heart 


66 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


the reality free from growth and change, whose being 
is beyond perception, the essence of equalness, un¬ 
equalled, immeasurable, perfectly taught by the words 
of inspiration, eternal, praised by us. 

In soul-vision the wise man perceives in his heart the 
unfading, undying reality, which by its own being can 
know no setting, like the shimmering water of the ocean, 
bearing no name, where quality and change have sunk 
to rest, eternal, peaceful, one. [410] 

Through intending the inner mind to it, gain vision 
of the Self, in its own form, the partless sovereignty. 
Sever thy bonds that are stained with the stain of life, 
and effortfully make thy manhood fruitful. 

Standing in the Self, realize the Self in being, the 
Self from every disguise set free, Being, Consciousness, 
Bliss, the secondless; thus shalt thou build no more for 
going forth. 

The mighty soul no more regards this body, cast 
aside like a corpse, seen to be but the shadow of the 
man, come into being as his reflection, through his enter¬ 
ing into the result of his works. 

Drawing near to the eternal, stainless awakening, 
whose nature is bliss, put very far away this disguise 
whose nature is inert and foul; nor let it be remembered 
again at all, for the remembrance of what has been cast 
forth builds for disdain. 

Burning this up with its root in the flame of the real 
Self, the unwavering Eternal, the wise man stands ex¬ 
cellent as the Self, through the Self which is eternal, 
pure, awakening bliss. 

The body is strung on the thread of works already 


FREE EVEN IN LIFE 


67 


done, and is impure as the blood of slaughtered kine; 
whether it goes forward or stands, the knower of reality 
regards it not again, for his life is dissolved in the 
Eternal, the Self of bliss. 

Knowing the partless bliss, the Self as his own self, 
with what desire or from what cause could the knower 
of reality cherish the body? 

Of the perfect adept this is the fruit, of the seeker 
for union, free even in life — to taste without and with¬ 
in the essence of being and bliss in the Self. 

The fruit of cleanness is awakening, the fruit of 
awakening is quiescence; from realizing the bliss of the 
Self comes peace, this fruit, verily, quiescence bears. 

When the latter of these is absent, the former is fruit¬ 
less. The supreme end is the incomparable enjoyment 
of the Self’s bliss. [420] 

The famed fruit of wisdom is not to tremble before 
manifest misfortune. The various works that were done 
in the season of delusion, worthy of all blame — how 
could a man deign to do them after discernment has 
been gained? 

Let the fruit of wisdom be cessation from unreality, 
a continuation therein is the fruit of unwisdom; — 
this is clearly seen. If there be not this difference be¬ 
tween him who knows and him who knows not, as in 
the presence of the mirage to the thirsty deer, where is 
the manifest fruit of wisdom? 

If the heart’s knot of unwisdom be destroyed with¬ 
out remainder, how could sensual things cause continu¬ 
ance in unreality, in him who has no desire? 

When mind-images arise not in the presence of sen- 


68 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


sual things, this is the limit of purity; when the per¬ 
sonal idea does not arise, this is the limit of illumina¬ 
tion. When life-activity that has been dissolved does 
not arise again, this is the limit of quiescence. 

He whose thought is free from outward objects, 
through standing ever in the nature of the Eternal, who 
is as lightly concerned with the enjoyment of sensual 
things followed by others as a sleeping child, looking on 
this world as a land beheld in dream, when conscious¬ 
ness comes back, enjoying the fruit of endless holy 
deeds, he is rich and worthy of honor in the world. 

This sage, standing firm in wisdom, reaches Being 
and Bliss, he is changeless, free from all acts, for his 
Self is dissolved in the Eternal. 

Being that is plunged in the oneness of the Eternal 
and the Self made pure, that wavers not and is pure 
consciousness alone, is called wisdom. 

They say he stands firm in wisdom, in whom this 
wisdom steadfastly dwells. He in whom wisdom is firm¬ 
ly established, who enjoys unbroken bliss, by whom the 
manifested world is almost unheeded, is called free even 
in life. 

He who with thought dissolved is yet awake, though 
free from the bondage of waking life, whose illumina¬ 
tion is free from impure mind-images, he, verily, is 
called free even in life. 

He who perceives that his soul’s pilgrimage is ended, 
who is free from disunion even while possessing divi¬ 
sion, whose imagination is free from imaginings, he, 
verily, is called free even in life. 

He who even while this body exists, regards it as a 


FREE EVEN IN LIFE 


69 


shadow, who has no sense of personality or possessions 
— these are the marks of him who is free in life. [430] 

Whose mind lingers not over the past, nor goes out 
after the future, when perfect equanimity is gained, 
this is the mark of him who is free even in life. 

In this world, whose very nature is full of differences, 
where quality and defect are distinguished, to regard 
all things everywhere as the same, this is the mark of 
him who is free even in life. 

Accepting wished and unwished objects with equa¬ 
nimity in the Self, and changing not in either event, is 
the mark of him who is free even in life. 

When the sage’s imagination is fixed on tasting the 
essence of the bliss of the Eternal, so that he distin¬ 
guishes not between what is within and without, this 
is the mark of him who is free even in life. 

Who is free from thought of “I” and “my,” in body 
and senses and their works, who stands in equanimity, 
bears the mark of one who is free even in life. 

He who has discerned the Eternal in the Self, through 
the power of sacred books, who is free from the bond¬ 
age of the world, bears the mark of one who is free 
even in life. 

He who never identifies himself with the body and 
senses, nor separates himself in thought from what is 
other than these, bears the mark of one who is free 
even in life. [438] 


The Three Kinds of Worl 


KB 


(Verses 439 — 468) 


t_te who through wisdom discerns that there is no 
* division between the Eternal and the manifested 
world, bears the mark of one who is free even in life. 


Whose mind is even, when honored by the good, or 
persecuted by the wicked, bears the mark of one who 
is free even in life. 

In whom all sensuous objects, put forth by the su¬ 
preme, melt together like the rivers and streams that 
enter the ocean’s treasure house, making no change at 
all, since he and they are but the one Being, this sage 
self-conquered is set free. 

For him who has understood the nature of the Eter¬ 
nal, there is no return to birth and death as of old; if 
such return there be, then the nature of the Eternal 
was not known. 

If they say he returns to birth and death through the 
rush of old imaginings, this is not true; for, from the 
knowledge of oneness, imaginings lose all their power. 

As the most lustful man ceases from desire before 
his mother; so, when the Eternal is known, the wise 
cease from desire, through fullness of bliss. 

The scripture says that, even for him who profoundly 
meditates, there is a going after outward things of sense, 
on account of Works already entered on. 

As long as there is the taste of pain and pleasure, so 
long are there Works already entered on; the fruits 


THE THREE KINDS OF WORKS 71 

come from the acts that went before; without these acts 
where would the fruits be? 

From the knowledge that I am the Eternal, the ac¬ 
cumulated Works, heaped up even through hundreds of 
myriads of ages, melt away like the work of dream, 
on awaking. 

Whatever one does while dreaming, however good 
or bad it seems, what effect has it on him, on awaking 
to send him either to hell or heaven? 

On knowing the Self, unattached, enthroned like the 
dome of heaven, the man is no longer stained at all by 
Works to come. 

As the ether enclosed in the jar is not stained by the 
smell of the wine, so the Self encompassed by its ves¬ 
tures, is not stained by any quality of theirs. [450] 

Works that have been entered on, before wisdom’s 
sunrise, are not destroyed by wisdom, until they have 
reached their fruition; like an arrow aimed and sent 
forth at the mark. 

The arrow discharged by the thought that there was 
a tiger, does not stop when it is seen to be a cow, but 
pierces the mark through its exceeding swiftness. 

Verily, Works entered on are the most formidable 
to the wise, they disappear only through being experi¬ 
enced. But Works accumulated and Works to come 
both melt away in the fire of perfect wisdom. 

When they have beheld the oneness of the Self and 
the Eternal, and stand ever firm in the power of that 
knowledge, for them those three kinds of Works exist 
no longer; for them there is only the Eternal, free from 
every change. 


72 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


When the saint rests in the Self, through understand¬ 
ing that the Self is other than its vestures, that the 
Self is the pure Eternal; then the myth of the reality 
of Works entered on no longer holds him, just as the 
myth of union with things of dream no longer holds 
him who has awakened. 

For he who is awake no longer keeps the sense of “I 
and mine and that,” for his looking-glass body and 
the world that belongs to it; but comes to himself 
merely through waking. 

Neither a desire for pursuing mythical objects, nor 
any grasping after even a world full of them, is seen in 
him who has awakened. But if the pursuit of mirages 
goes on, then it is seen for certain that the man has not 
wakened from sleep. 

Thus dwelling in the supreme Eternal, through the 
real Self, he stands and beholds naught else. Like the 
memory of an object looked on in dream, so is it, for 
the wise, with eating or the other acts of life. 

The body is built up through Works; the Works en¬ 
tered upon make for the building up of various forms; 
but the Self is not built up through works. 

“Unborn, eternal, immemorial,” says the Scripture, 
whose words are not in vain; of him who rests in that 
Self, what building up of Works entered on can there 
be? 

Works entered upon flourish then, when the Self is 
identified with the body; but the identifying of Self 
with body brings no joy, therefore let Works entered 
upon be renounced. [460] 

Even the building up of a body through Works en- 


THE THREE KINDS OF WORKS 


73 


tercd on is a mirage; whence can come the reality of a 
mere reflected image? whence can come the birth of 
an unreality? 

Whence can come the death of what has not even 
been born? Whence can come the entering on of what 
does not even exist? — if there be a melting away of 
the effects of unwisdom, root and all, through the 
power of wisdom. 

How does this body stand? In the case of him who 
takes inert things to be real, Works entered on are sup¬ 
ported by the sight of outward things — thus says the 
scripture; yet it does not teach the reality of the body 
and the like, to the wise. 

One, verily, is the Eternal, without a second. There 
is no difference at all. Altogether perfect, without be¬ 
ginning or end, measureless and without change. 

The home of Being, the home of Consciousness, the 
home of Bliss enduring, changeless; one, verily, with¬ 
out a second, is the Eternal. There is no difference 
at all. 

Full of the pure essence of the unmanifested, endless, 
at the crown of all; one, verily, without a second, is 
the Eternal; there is no difference at all. 

That can neither be put away, nor sought after; 
that can neither be taken nor approached — one, verily, 
without a second, is the Eternal; there is no difference 
at all. 

Without qualities, without parts, subtle, without 
wavering, without stain; one, verily, without a second, 
is the Eternal; there is no difference at all. [468] 


Master and Pupil 

(Verses 469 — 518) 

The Teacher Speaks : 

hriHAT, whose nature no man can define; where is no 
pasturage for mind or word; one, verily, without 
second, is the Eternal; there is no difference at all. 

The fullness of Being, self-perfect, pure, awakened, 
unlike aught here; one, verily, without second, is the 
Eternal; there is no difference at all! 

They who have cast away passion, who have cast 
away sensual delights, peaceful, well-ruled, the sages, 
the mighty, knowing reality in the supreme consumma¬ 
tion, have gained the highest joy in union with the Self. 

Thou worthy one also, seeking this higher reality of 
the Self, whose whole nature is the fullness of bliss, 
washing away the delusions thine own mind has built 
up, be free, gaining thy end, perfectly awakened. 

Through Soul-vision, through the Self utterly un¬ 
shaken, behold the Self’s reality, by the clear eye of 
awakening; if the word of the scripture is perfectly 
perceived without wavering, then doubt arises no more. 

On gaining freedom from the bonds bound by unwis¬ 
dom as to the Self; in the gaining of that Self whose 
nature is truth, knowledge, bliss; the holy books, rea¬ 
son, and the word of the guide are one’s evidences; an 
evidence too is the realizing of the Self, inwardly at¬ 
tained. 

Freedom from bondage and joy, health of thought 


MASTER AND PUPIL 75 

and happiness, are to be known by one’s self; the know¬ 
ing of others is but inference. 

As the teachers, who have reached the further shore, 
and the teachings tell, let a man cross over through 
that enlightenment which comes through the will of 
the higher Self. 

Knowing the Self through one’s own realization, as 
one’s own partless Self, and being perfected, let him 
stand firm in the unwavering Self. 

This is the last and final word of the teaching: The 
Eternal is the individual life and the whole world; rest 
in the partless One is freedom, in the Eternal, the sec- 
ondless; and this too the scriptures show. 

Through the word of the Guide, and the evidence of 
the teaching, understanding the highest Being, through 
union with the Self, he reached perfect peace, intent on 
the Self, so that nothing could disturb him any more, 
resting altogether in the Self. 

Then after intending his mind for a while on the su¬ 
preme Eternal, rising again from the highest bliss he 
spoke this word: [480] 

The Pupil Speaks: 

Entangling thought has fallen away, its activity has 
dissolved, through mastery of the Self’s oneness with 
the Eternal; I know not this, nor anything that is not 
this; for what is it? how great is it? joy is its further 
shore. 

This cannot be spoken by voice, nor thought by mind; 
I taste the glory of the ocean of the Supreme Eternal, 
filled full of the ambrosial bliss of the Self. My mind, 


76 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


enjoying delight, like a watercourse, that had dried up, 
when the multitude of waters come, is full of happiness, 
even from the slightest portion of the honey-sweet bliss 
of the Self. 

Whither has this world of sorrow gone? what has 
taken it away? whither has it dissolved? Now I see 
that it no longer is — a mighty wonder! 

What is there for me to reject? what to choose? 
what else exists? Where is there difference in the 
mighty ocean of the Eternal, full of the nectar of part¬ 
less bliss? 

I see not, nor hear, nor know aught of this world; 
for I bear the mark of the Self, whose form is being 
and bliss. 

Honor, honor to thee, my Guide, mighty-souled; to 
thee, who art free from sensuous bondage, who art 
most excellent, whose own nature is the essence of bliss 
of the secondless Everlasting, whose words are ever a 
mighty, shoreless ocean of pity. 

As one who was wearied with the heat, bathing him¬ 
self and refreshed, in the enveloping light of the rayed 
moon, thus I have in a moment gained the partless ex¬ 
cellent bliss, the imperishable word, the Self. 

Rich am I, I have done what was to be done, freed 
am I from the grasp of the sorrowing world. My own 
being is everlasting bliss, I am filled full, through the 
favor of the Self. 

Unbound am I, formless am I, without distinction 
am I, no longer able to be broken; in perfect peace am 
I, and endless; I am stainless, immemorial. 


MASTER AND PUPIL 


77 


I am neither the doer nor enjoyer; mine are neither 
change nor act. I am in nature pure awakening. I am 
the lonely One, august for ever. [490] 

I am apart from the personal self that sees, hears, 
speaks, acts, and enjoys; everlasting, innermost, with¬ 
out act; the limitless, unbound, perfect Self awakened. 

I am neither this nor that; I am even he who illu¬ 
mines both, the supreme, the pure; for me is neither 
inner nor outer, for I am the perfect, secondless Eter¬ 
nal. 

The unequalled, beginningless reality is far from the 
thought of I and thou, of this and that; I am the one 
essence of everlasting bliss, the real, the secondless 
Eternal. 

I am the Creator, I am he who makes an end of hell, 
he who makes an end of all things old; I am the Spirit, 
I am the Lord; I am partless awakening, the endless 
witness; for me there is no longer any Lord, no longer 
I nor mine. 

For I, verily, consist in all beings, enveloping them 
within and without, through the Self that knows; I 
myself am at once the enjoyer and all that is to be 
enjoyed — whatever was seen before as separate 
through identity with it. 

In me, the ocean of partless Bliss, world-waves rise 
manifold, and fall again, through the storm-winds of 
glamor’s magic. 

In me, the material and other worlds are built up 
by glamor, through swift vibrations; just as in Time 
which has neither part nor division, are built up the 
world-periods, the years, the seasons, months, and days. 


78 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Nor does the Self, on which the worlds are built, be¬ 
come stained by them, even through the deluded who 
are stained by many sins; just as even a mighty flood 
of mirage waters wets not the salt desert earth. 

Like the ether, I spread throughout the world; like 
the sun, I am marked by my shining; like the hills, I 
am everlasting and unmoved; I am like an ocean with¬ 
out shores. 

I am not bound by the body, as the clear sky is not 
bound by clouds; whence then should the characters of 
waking, dreaming, dreamlessness, belong to me?[500] 

The veil comes, and, verily, departs again; it alone 
performs works and enjoys them. It alone wastes away 
and dies, while I stand like a mighty mountain, forever 
unmoved. 

Neither forth-going nor return belong to me, whose 
form is ever one, without division. He who is the one 
Self, without fissure or separation, perfect like the ether 
— how can he strive or act? 

How should righteousness or sin belong to me, who 
possess not the powers of sense, who am above emotion, 
above form and change, who experience ever partless 
bliss; for the scripture teaches that in the Self is neither 
righteousness nor sin. 

What is touched by his shadow, whether heat or 
cold, or foul or fair, touches not at all the man, who is 
other than his shadow. 

The natures of things beheld touch not the beholder, 
who is apart from them, sitting above unchanged, as 
the character of the house affects not the lamp. 


MASTER AND PUPIL 


79 


Like the sun which witnesses the act, like the 
tongued flame that leads the conflagration, like the 
rope that holds what is raised; thus am I, standing on 
the summit, the conscious Self. 

I am neither the actor, nor the causer of acts; I am 
neither he who enjoys, nor he who brings enjoyment; 
I am neither the seer, nor he who gives sight; I am the 
unequalled Self, self-luminous. 

When the disguise moves, just as the foolish-minded 
attribute to the sun the dancing of its reflection on the 
water, so one thinks: I am the doer, the enjoyer; I, also, 
am slain. 

Let this inert body move on the waters or on dry 
land; I am not thereby stained by their natures, as the 
ether is not stained by the nature of a jar. 

Acting, enjoying, baseness or madness, inertness or 
bondage or unloosing are the changes of the mind, and 
belong not really to the Self, the supreme Eternal, the 
pure, the secondless. [510] 

Let Nature suffer changes ten times, a hundred, a 
thousand times; what have I to do with these commo¬ 
tions? For the lowering clouds touch not the sky. 

From the unmanifest, down to grossest things, all 
this world encountered is a mere reflection only. Like 
the ether, subtle, without beginning or end, is the sec¬ 
ondless Eternal; and what that is, I am. 

All-embracing, illumining all things; under all forms 
all-present, yet outside all; everlasting, pure, unmoved, 
unchanging, is the secondless Eternal; and what that 
is, I am. 

Where the differences made by glamor have sunk to 


80 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


final setting, of hidden nature, perceived in secret, the 
Real, Wisdom, Bliss, and formed of bliss, is the second- 
less Eternal; and what that is, I am. 

Without act am I, without change, without division, 
without form; without wavering am I, everlasting am 
I, resting on naught else, and secondless. 

I am altogether the Self, I am the All; I transcend 
all; there is none but me. I am pure, partless awaken¬ 
ing; I too am unbroken bliss. 

This sovereignty, self-rule, and mighty power, through 
the goodness of thy pity, power, and might, has been 
gained by me, my guide, great-souled; honor, honor to 
thee, and yet again honor. 

In that great dream that glamor makes, in that for¬ 
est of birth and age and death, I wander wearying; 
daily stricken by the heat, and haunted by the tiger of 
selfishness; thou hast saved me, my guide, by waking 
me out of sleep. [518] 


Tlie Perfect Sade 


(Verses 519 — 548) 
The Pupil Speaks: 


H onor to that one Being, wherever it is; honor to the 
Light which shines through the form of all that 
is; and to thee king of teachers! 

Beholding him thus paying honor — a pupil full of 
worth, full of the joy of soul-vision, awakened to re¬ 
ality — that king of instructors, rejoicing in his heart, 
that mighty souled one, addressed to him this final 

worc *’ The Teacher Speaks: 


This world is the offspring of the Eternal’s thought; 
thus, verily, the Eternal is the Real in all things. Be¬ 
hold it thus by the vision of the higher Self, with mind 
full of peace, in every mode of being. A certain Being, 
apart from form, is seen everywhere, of those who have 
eyes to see. Therefore knowers of the Eternal under¬ 
stand that whatever is other than this, is but the sport 
and workmanship of intellect. 

Who, being wise, and tasting that essence of supreme 
bliss, would delight any more in things of emptiness? 
Who desires to look on a painted moon, when the moon, 
the giver of delight, is shining? 

For through enjoyment of unreal things, there is no 
contentment at all, nor any getting rid of pain. There¬ 
fore contented by enjoying the essence of secondless 
bliss, stand thou rejoicing, resting on the Self that is 
true Being. 


82 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Therefore beholding thyself everywhere, and con¬ 
sidering thyself as secondless, let the time go by for 
thee, mighty minded one, rejoicing in the bliss that is 
thine own. 

And wavering doubt in the Self of partless awakening 
which wavers not, is but of fancy’s building; therefore 
through the Self which is formed of secondless bliss, 
entering into lasting peace, adore in silence. 

In the silence is the highest peace, because wavering 
is the intellect’s unreal work; there the knowers of the 
Eternal, mighty-souled, enjoy unbroken happiness of 
partless bliss, recognizing the Self as the Eternal. 

There is no higher cause of joy than silence where 
no mind-pictures dwell; it belongs to him who has un¬ 
derstood the Self’s own being; who is full of the essence 
of the bliss of the Self. 

Whether walking or standing, sitting or lying down, 
or wherever he may be, let the sage dwell according to 
his will, the wise man finding joy ever within himself. 

No distinctions of place or time, position or space 
are to be regarded as bringing release from bondage, 
for the mighty-souled, who has perfectly attained to 
reality. Of what avail are the rites of religion for one 
who has attained to wisdom? 

What religious rite will help one to know a jar, with¬ 
out having perceived it? But where there is direct per¬ 
ception, the object is perfectly understood. [530] 

So when there is direct perception, the Self shines 
forth clearly, without regard to place or time or rites 
of purification. 

The direct knowledge, that “I am Devadatta,” de- 


THE PERFECT SAGE 


83 


pends on nothing else; and it is precisely thus with the 
knowledge that “I am the Eternal/’ in the case of the 
knower of the Eternal. 

How could the not Self, the mere chaff of unreality, 
be the illuminer of that through the radiance of which 
the whole world shines, as through the sun? 

How can the scriptures or laws or traditions, or even 
all beings, illumine that by which alone they gain their 
worth? 

This Self, self-illumined, is of unending power, im¬ 
measurable, the direct knowledge of all; knowing this, 
the knower of the Eternal, freed from bondage, most 
excellent, gains the victory. 

Things of sense neither distress nor elate him beyond 
measure, nor is he attached to, or repelled by them; 
in the Self he ever joys, the Self is his rejoicing; alto¬ 
gether contented by the essence of uninterrupted bliss. 

As a child, who is free from hunger and bodily pain, 
finds delight in play, so the wise man rejoices, free from 
the sorrow of “I” and “mine.” 

His food is what is freely offered, eaten without anx¬ 
iety or sense of poverty; his drink is the pure water 
of the streams; he moves where fancy leads him, uncon¬ 
strained; he sleeps by the river-bank, or in the wood; 
for his vesture is one that grows not old or worn; his 
home is space; his couch, the world; he moves in paths 
where the beaten road is ended; the wise man, delight¬ 
ing in the supreme Eternal. 

Dwelling in this body as a mere temporary halting- 
place, he meets the things of sense just as they come, 
like a child subject to another’s will; thus lives the 


84 


THE CREST-JEWEL OE WISDOM 


knower of the Self, who shows no outward sign, nor is 
attached to external things. 

Whether clothed in space alone, or wearing other 
vestures, or clothed in skins, or in a vesture of thought; 
like one in trance, or like a child, or like a shade, he 
walks the earth. [540] 

Withdrawing desire from the things of desire, ever 
contented in the Self, the sage stands firm through the 
Self alone. 

Now as a fool, now a wise man; now as a great and 
wealthy king; now a wanderer, now a sage; now dwell¬ 
ing like a serpent, solitary; now full of honor; now re¬ 
jected and unknown; thus the sage walks, ever rejoic¬ 
ing in perfect bliss. 

Though without wealth, contented ever; ever rejoic¬ 
ing, though without sensuous enjoyments; though not 
like others, yet ever seeming as the rest. 

Ever active, though acting not at all; though tast¬ 
ing no experience, yet experiencing all; bodiless, 
though possessing a body; though limited, yet penetrat¬ 
ing all. 

This knower of the Eternal, ever bodiless, things 
pleasant or painful touch not at all, nor things fair or 
foul. 

For pleasure and pain, things fair and foul, are for 
him who is bound by the vestures, who believes them 
real; but for him whose bonds are broken, for the sage 
whose Self is real Being, what fruit is fair, or what is 
foul? 

Just as in an eclipse of the sun, people say, “the sun 
is darkened,” though the sun indeed is not darkened, 


THE PERFECT SAGE 85 

and they speak ignorantly, knowing not the truth of 
things. 

Thus verily they behold the most excellent knower of 
Brahma as though bound to a body, while he is in truth 
freed for ever from the body, and they are deluded by 
the mere seeming of the body. [548] 


For Ever Free 


(Verses 549 — 561) 


The Serpent's Slough 


B ut the body he has left, like the cast-off slough of 
a snake, remains there, moved hither and thither 
by every wind of life. 

As a tree is carried down by a stream, and stranded 
on every shallow; so is his body carried along to one 
sensation after another. 

Through the mind-pictures built up by works al¬ 
ready entered on, the body of him who has reached 
freedom wanders among sensations, like an animal; 
but the adept himself dwells in silence, looking on, like 
the center of a wheel, having neither doubts nor desires. 

He no longer engages his powers in things of sense, 
nor needs to disengage them; for he stands in the char¬ 
acter of observer only. He no longer looks at all to the 
personal reward of his acts; for his heart is full of exul¬ 
tation, drunk with the abounding essence of bliss. 

Leaving the path of things known or unknown, he 
stands in the Self alone; like a god in presence is this 
most excellent knower of the Eternal. 

Though still in life, yet ever free; his last aim reached; 
the most excellent knower of the Eternal, when his dis¬ 
guise falls off, becoming the Eternal, enters into the 
secondless Eternal. 

Like a mimic, who has worn the disguises of well¬ 
being and ill, the most excellent knower of the Eternal 
was Brahma all the time, and no other. 


FOR EVER FREE 


87 


The body of the sage who has become the Eternal 
is consumed away, even before it has fallen to the 
ground — like a fresh leaf withered — by the fire of 
consciousness. 

The sage who stands in the Eternal, the Self of being, 
ever full, of the secondless bliss of the Self, has none 
of the hopes fitted to time and space that make for the 
formation of a body of skin, and flesh, subject to dis¬ 
solution. 

Putting off the body is not Freedom, any more than 
putting away one’s staff and waterpot; but getting free 
from the knots of unwisdom in the heart — that is 
Freedom, in very deed. 

Whether its leaf fall in a running river, or on holy 
ground, prepared for sacred rites, what odds does it 
make to the tree for good or ill? 

Like the loss of a leaf, or a flower, or a fruit, is the 
loss of the body, or powers, or vital breath, or mind; 
but the Self itself, ever one’s own, formed of bliss, is 
like the tree and stands. 

The divine saying declares the Self to be the assem¬ 
blage of all consciousness; the real is the actor, and they 
speak only of the destruction of the disguise — un¬ 
wisdom. 


It ft 


X 


-J 



SsVi 


'\ 


0 


The Self Endures 
(V erses 562 — 574) 

Indestructible, verily, is the Self — thus says the 
scripture of the Self, declaring that it is not destroyed 
when all its changing vestures are destroyed. 

Stones, and trees, grass, and corn, and straw are con- 



88 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


sumed by fire, but the earth itself remains the same. 
So the body, powers, life, breath and mind and all 
things visible, are burned up by the fire of wisdom, leav¬ 
ing the being of the higher Self alone. 

As the darkness, that is its opposite, is melted away 
in the radiance of the sun, so, indeed, all things visible 
are melted away in the Eternal. 

As, when the jar is broken, the space in it becomes 
clear space, so, when the disguises melt away, the Eter¬ 
nal stands as the Eternal and the Self. 

As milk poured in milk, oil in oil, water in water, be¬ 
comes perfectly one, so the sage who knows the Self 
becomes one with the Self. 

Thus reaching bodiless purity, mere Being, partless, 
the being of the Eternal, the sage returns to this world 
no more. 

He whose forms born of unwisdom are burnt up by 
knowledge of oneness with the everlasting Self, since he 
has become the Eternal, how could he, being the Eter¬ 
nal, come to birth again? 

Both bonds and the getting rid of them are works of 
glamor, and exist not really in the Self; they are like 
the presence of the imagined serpent and its vanishing, 
in the rope which really does not change. 

Binding and getting rid of bondage have to be spoken 
of, because of the existence, and yet the unreality, of 
enveloping by unwisdom. But there is no enveloping 
of the Eternal; it is not enveloped because nothing 
besides the Eternal exists to envelop it. 

The binding and the getting rid of bondage are both 
mirages; the deluded attribute the work of thought to 


FOR EVER FREE 


89 


the thing itself; just as they attribute the cloud-born 
cutting off of vision to the sun; for the unchanging is 
secondless consciousness, free from every clinging 
stain. 

The belief that bondage of the Real, is, and the be¬ 
lief that it has ceased, are both mere things of thought; 
not of the everlasting Real. 

Therefore these two, glamor-built, bondage and the 
getting rid of bonds, exist not in the Real; the partless, 
changeless, peaceful; the unassailable, stainless; for 
what building-up could there be in the secondless, su¬ 
preme reality, any more than in clear space? 

There is no limiting, nor letting go, no binding nor 
gaining of success; there is neither the seeker of Free¬ 
dom, nor the free; this, verily, is the ultimate truth. 

Benediction 
(Verses 575 — 580) 

This secret of secrets supreme, the perfect attain¬ 
ment, the perfection of the Self, has been shown to thee 
by me today; making thee as my new-born child, freed 
from the sin of the iron age, all thought of desire gone, 
making towards Freedom. 

Thus hearing the teacher’s words and paying him 
due reverence, he went forth, free from his bondage, 
with the Master’s consent. 

And he, the Teacher, his mind bathed in the happy 
streams of Being, went forth to make the whole world 
clean, incessantly. 

Thus, by this Discourse of Teacher and Pupil, the 


90 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


character of the Self is taught to those seeking Freedom, 
that they may be born to the joy of awakening. 

Therefore let all those who put away and cast aside 
every sin of thought, who are sated with this world’s 
joys, whose thoughts are full of peace, who delight in 
words of wisdom, who rule themselves, who long to be 
free, draw near to this teaching, which is dedicated to 
them. 

To those who, on the road of birth and death, are 
sore stricken by the heat that the rays of the sun of 
pain pour down; who wander through this desert-world, 
in weariness and longing for water; this well-spring of 
wisdom, close at hand, is pointed out, to bring them 
joy — the secondless Eternal. This Teaching of San¬ 
kara’s bringing Liberation, wins the victory for them. 

Thus is ended The Crest-Jewel of Wisdom, made 
by the ever-blessed Sankara, pupil at the holy feet of 
Govinda his Teacher, the supreme Swan, the Wanderer 
of the World. 


The Heritage of the Brah mans 

by Charles Johnston 




The Heritage of the Brahmans 

I t is said that long ago, in the childhood of the world, 
the senses were so fine that we could hear the grow¬ 
ing of the grass, the rustling of the opening buds of 
spring. By a memory of these early senses, by the 
faint remnant of them that the long ages in their pass¬ 
age have left us, we can hear now the faint stirring of 
the opening buds of a new spring of intellectual life, a 
new period in the spiritual thought of the world; and 
the key-note of this new period is the East, the wisdom 
of the East, the thought and ideals of the East. 

Not merely or necessarily the East in latitude, but 
rather the Eastern side of man — that East in the soul 
of every man where the sun rises, where the light of 
intuition opens its first dawning rays, and, rising, 
guides the lesser lives among its rays.” And yet the 
East in latitude gives the key-note to the new dawn of 
thought in a special sense too. For it was in the East, 
and, more than all, in India, “mother of nations, that 
the eastern part of man where the sun rises found its 
best development; that the interior light of the soul 
found its fullest recognition. 

And it is only natural that the minds of men, feeling 
the first gleam of dawning day, should turn towards the 
East; that they should grow enthusiastic for the Lands 
of the East, and, more than all, for India: that India 
should occupy an ever-widening space on the horizon 
of their thoughts; that their hearts should more and 
more turn towards India. 


94 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 

This growing interest and enthusiasm for India — 
an enthusiasm at first almost instinctive, but gradually 
quickened by advancing knowledge — is especially 
felt today in the two most idealistic nations in the 
West, the Americans and the Germans. For with all 
their sense of practical life and practical development, 
the Americans and Germans are at heart idealists; 
ready to sacrifice all their practical aims and practical 
accomplishment to a vision; ready, as Emerson said, 
to leave Cleopatra and the army, to seek the sources 
of the Nile. 

The deepest curiosity of the Americans and Germans, 
turning towards India, unquestionably centers on the 
Brahmans; one hears again and again the words — the 
wisdom of the Brahmans, the ideal of the Brahmans, 
the life of the Brahmans; and the first question one is 
always asked refers to the Brahman order. To answer 
this question, it would be necessary to write many vol¬ 
umes; to trace the rise of the Brahman order in the 
dim twilight of Vedic days; to show the growth and con¬ 
solidation of their power in the days of Rama, and 
through the struggles of the great war of the Pandu 
and Kuru princes; to point to certain dark sides of their 
development that had become visible in Buddha’s days; 
and at last to fill in the splendid picture of Brahmanic 
advance and Brahmanic development in Sankara- 
charya’s days. 

When the records of the monasteries of Southern 
India are more fully known and understood, when the 
Smarta Brahmans who have preserved most clearly the 
splendid tradition of Sankara relax a little their reserve, 


THE HERITAGE OF THE BRAHMANS 


95 


we shall — it can hardly be doubted — have a picture 
of that great man and his times as perfect and full of 
color as the picture we have of Plato’s times, and the 
thought of Plato who, more than any other philosopher, 
resembles Sankara. 

What we know of Sankara already, though only a 
tithe of what we may know when old records are opened, 
is enough to give him a place amongst the choicest 
spiritual aristocracy of the world, as a seer and thinker 
who towered above his race as Plato towered above the 
Greeks; as a Great Man, an elder brother of the race, 
whose thought and insight mark a high tide of human 
life. 

There is a dim tradition, in the oldest Indian books, 
in the great Upanishads, and the earlier Vedic hymns, 
that the Brahmans were not in the beginning the spiri¬ 
tual teachers of India; that they received their earliest 
wisdom from the Royal Sages of the Rajanya or Ksha- 
ttriya race. But the Brahmans have so long held these 
treasures of wisdom as their own— guarding them as 
a mother her child, as a man his first-born — that they 
have come to consider them as their very own; their 
heritage rather by birth than by adoption. The fact 
that, in spite of this jealous love of their darling trea¬ 
sures, they have preserved the tradition of their earli¬ 
est Royal Teachers, points to the most valued feature 
in the Brahmans’ character; — the unflinching, unal¬ 
terable fidelity with which they have preserved, unal¬ 
tered and inviolate, the spiritual treasures committed 
to their care; and the safe-guarding of which through 
the ages forms their truest and greatest title of fame; 


96 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


the best justification for that instinctive turning towards 
the Brahmans as the center and representative of In¬ 
dian genius, which we have noted as so marked a feature 
of the Indian Renaissance today. 

But once the Brahmans had received the wisdom- 
doctrines from their Royal Teachers, their distinctive 
genius, their most valued quality, began to assert itself. 
With their unparalleled genius for order, their instinc¬ 
tive feeling for preservation, they recorded, classified 
and developed the intuitive wisdom of the Royal Sages 
— Buddha, a Royal Sage of far later days, has put on 
record this unparalleled fidelity: “those ancient Rishis 
of the Brahmans, versed in the Three Wisdoms, the 
authors of the verses, the utterers of the verses, whose 
ancient form of words so chanted, uttered, or composed, 
the Brahmans of today chant over again and repeat; 
intoning or reciting, exactly as has been intoned or re¬ 
cited.” — (Tevigga Sutta). 

That Krishna, the spiritual hero of the Mahabharata 
war, whose mission it was to usher in the Iron Age of 
Kali Yuga, was no Brahman but a Kshattriya, who 
traced his doctrines from Manu the Kshattriya through 
the Royal Sages, is enough to show that in the days of 
the great war, the Brahmans had not yet claimed as 
quite their own the teachings of wisdom which it was 
their mission to hand down through the ages. (Bha- 
gavad-Gita, iv). 

The great war, according to Indian tradition, was 
fought out five thousand years ago. And, after the 
great war, in which so many Kshattriya princes fell, 
the keeping of the Sacred records began to pass com- 


THE HERITAGE OF THE BRAHMANS 


97 


pletely into the hands of the Brahmans. The Brahmans, 
sensible of their great mission, prepared themselves to 
carry it out by forming a high ideal of life; by strict 
rules of conduct and discipline which only the highest 
characters could support; and the very strictness of 
which seems to have produced a reaction which we see 
traces of in Buddha’s days. 

The life of the Brahman was conceived and moulded 
in accordance with his high ideal; in accordance with 
his high destiny as transmitter of the wisdom of the 
Golden Age across the centuries to our dark iron days. 
Purity, unworldliness, and discipline were the key-notes 
of his life; and the Brahman’s unparalleled genius for 
order gradually moulded this ideal into a set of definite 
rules, a series of religious ceremonies, which laid hold 
on his life before he saw the light of day, and did not 
loose that hold when his body vanished among the red 
embers of the funeral pyre — but rather kept in touch 
with him, through the Sraddha offering to the shades 
for nine generations after his death. 

This life of ceremonies and rites, the key-note of 
which was the acquiring and transmission of the Three 
Wisdoms spoken of by Buddha, gradually made of the 
Brahman order a treasure-box or casket for the safer 
keeping of the holy records handed down. Whether 
the Brahmans were originally of the fair, almost white 
race which forms their nucleus today, and whose dis¬ 
tinctive physical character and color make a Brahman 
of pure type at once recognizable in an assemblage of 
Hindus, is a question difficult to solve. We find in the 
oldest Indian books that: “The color of the Brahman 


98 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


is white,” and this, in later days became a sentence sym¬ 
bolical of their ideal of purity; but in the beginning it 
may have been a description of their color, an index 
of their race. 

It is very probable that this fair, almost white race, 
which now forms the nucleus of the Brahman order, 
gradually became, through selective genius, through 
their unequalled instinct of order, the recognized re¬ 
pository and transmitter of the sacred records of the 
past. But the ideal life of the Brahman was, perhaps, 
too arduous for the common lot of man; at any rate we 
see a gradually increasing tendency to degeneration in 
one side of the Brahman’s life; for in India as in other 
lands, even silver clouds have their dark linings. 

Their instinct for order, among the Brahmans of 
lesser moral structure than the high ideal of their race, 
became an instinct for ceremonial; their ideal of purity 
became a habit of outward purification; and they 
tended to harden into an exclusive priestly caste, with¬ 
drawn from, and above the common life of man. The 
priestcraft, by a second step, began to weave ambitions, 
to seek a share of political power, and at last, a prac¬ 
tical predominance in the state, which threatened to 
become a spiritual tyranny. 

But these developments, inseparable from the weak¬ 
ness of human life, were but the rusting of the outer 
layer of the casket in which the wisdom of the Golden 
Age was handed down. There were also within the 
Brahman order — as there are today — men who held 
to the high ideal of their past; who were fitting re¬ 
positories of the high tradition they were destined to 


THE HERITAGE OF THE BRAHMANS 


99 


carry down. The casket in which were held the records 
of the past had always its lining of precious metal, 
though the outside might rust and tarnish with the pass¬ 
ing ages. 

The greatest of these followers of that high idea, in 
later days, within the Brahman caste, was Sankara- 
charya, the Brahman Sage of Southern India. It is 
hard to say, with certainty, when Sankara lived; but 
the records of Sringiri, where his successors have held 
rule over the nucleus of the Brahman order, point to a 
period about two millenniums ago; a period, that is, just 
outside the threshold of our era. 

Sankaracharya began the work of reforming the 
Brahman caste from within. A few centuries before 
him, Buddha had scattered broadcast through India, 
and Buddha's followers had scattered broadcast through 
the world, the teachings of India’s Golden Days, in a 
form readily intelligible for all, and to be assimilated 
by the simplest mind of man. 

It remained to do for India, what, perhaps, others 
were doing, across the Himalayas, for the whole world; 
to preserve inviolate, and transmit in its purity that 
other side of wisdom which the simplest heart of man 
can intuitively feel; but which only the most perfectly 
developed powers, the most fully expanded intellect 
and spiritual insight can fully and consciously grasp; 
it remained to secure the preservation of those pro¬ 
founder truths and that deeper knowledge which only 
the finest powers of the soul can adequately compre¬ 
hend. 

To secure their preservation in India was the duty 


100 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


and mission of Sankaracharya. Believing that this 
preservation should be helped and seconded by what¬ 
ever aids selective race genius and hereditary capacity 
could give, he confined the transmission of this wisdom, 
and of the records which contained it, entirely within 
the Brahman order, as far as our knowledge goes. 
There is evidence that, among the Brahmans of South¬ 
ern India in early days, were a certain number of 
families not belonging to that white race which forms 
the nucleus of the Brahman caste; but belonging to 
the dark, almost black Dravidian peoples of South¬ 
ern India, who are the survivors, perhaps, of a land 
that once lay to the south of India, but has now van¬ 
ished beneath the waves. This dark Dravidian race has 
produced many men of remarkable genius and power, 
whose insight and force quite fitted them for inclusion 
in the Brahman order. 

But as the centuries moved on, such admission be¬ 
came more difficult; till, in the days of Sankara, it is 
probable that the door was completely closed. What 
changes Sankara made in the Brahman order which 
followed him, in the division of the Brahmans which 
recognized his transcendent force, can only be known 
with surety to the Brahmans of that order themselves. 
But this much we know, that Sankara did all his over¬ 
powering genius could accomplish to turn the Brahmans 
from too exclusive following after ceremonial; to lead 
them back to the spiritual wisdom, the recognition of 
the inner light of the soul, which was India’s greatest 
heritage; and that, taking India’s most precious records, 
the Great Upanishads, he rendered them into the thought 


THE HERITAGE OF THE BRAHMANS 


101 


and language of his own day, and did all that a marve¬ 
lous insight and a literary style of wonderful lucidity 
could do to make the spirit and the genius of the Upani- 
shads live once more in the hearts of the Brahmans of 
his time. 

He set himself, above all, to cleanse the inner lin¬ 
ing of the casket where India’s treasures lay concealed; 
to remove every speck from the precious metal whose 
perfect purity alone could guarantee the costly con¬ 
tents against rust and moth. The reforms inaugurated 
by Sankaracharya continue to bear fruit today; the 
new light he shed on the old records, the new insight 
he gave to the old symbols, are the treasured inheri¬ 
tance of the Smarta Brahmans, whose spiritual heads, 
in unbroken succession, have ruled at Sringiri Math, in 
the mountains of Northern India. 

Centuries passed, and the sunlit plains of India were 
filled with Moslem invaders, falling like swarms of lo¬ 
custs on the rich gardens of that distant wonderland; 
full of the fierce hostility of fanaticism against the 
symbols of a religion they did not understand; and 
against the Brahmans, as ministers of this religion. It 
would not be wonderful, it would rather be perfectly 
natural, if this hostility and predominance of a foreign 
fanatical power had sealed the lips of the Brahmans 
once for all as to the mysteries of their religion; had 
locked and double-locked the casket in which the heri¬ 
tage of India lay concealed. 

But in spite of tyranny and fanaticism that would 
have justified the most perfect reticence, the most ab¬ 
solute silence, the Brahmans retained an ideal of their 


102 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


universal mission, above and beyond their mission to 
their own land and their own religion. No sooner did 
brighter days dawn for them under the Emperor Akbar, 
the great Indian monarch of the sixteenth century who 
conceived and framed a high ideal of religious toler¬ 
ance and mutual understanding which was the nearest 
approach to State Theosophy; no sooner did the 
brighter day dawn than the Brahmans were ready to 
forget old griefs and to teach their Moslem rulers the 
broad principles of their religion. 

Two generations after Akbar, Akbar’s noblest and 
most ill-fated descendant, Prince Dara Shukoh, received 
from the Brahmans the permission to translate into 
Persian a series of the Upanishads, including the Great 
Upanishads of which something has been already said. 
This Persian translation, besides following the words 
of the old records, put into visible form much that had 
been hidden between the lines, and followed, in some de¬ 
gree, the new light that had been shed on the Upani¬ 
shads by the genius of Sankaracharya. 

This Persian translation of the Upanishads, which 
embodies a very valuable tradition of their hidden 
meaning, made about the year 1640, was found by An- 
quetil Duperron in 1775, and by him translated into 
Latin. From Anquetil Duperron this “Key to the In¬ 
dian Sanctuary” passed to Schopenhauer, and becom¬ 
ing “the comfort of his life, the comfort of his death” 
led him to prophesy that Indian Renaissance which is 
glowing with the fair colors of dawn today. 

But under Dara Shukoh’s brother, the fanatical 
Aurungzeb, darker days fell upon the Brahmans; and 


THE HERITAGE OF THE BRAHMANS 


103 


they suffered much from European nations more pre¬ 
sumptuous and not less fanatical than Aurungzeb; of 
these the darkest record clings to the Portuguese, who 
tried to wring from the Brahmans the heart of their 
mystery by Inquisition and auto-da-fe. 

Yet, once more, just a hundred years ago when a 
group of Europeans full of love for the East, sought 
from the Brahmans some knowledge of their learning, 
the Brahmans, with singular generosity, made these 
Europeans in some degree sharers in their heritage. 
From the knowledge thus freely given to these Euro¬ 
peans, whose chiefs were William Jones and Thomas 
Colebrooke, the first foundations of Orientalism were 
laid; and a field of matchless fertility was opened to a 
growing band of workers who enrolled themselves un¬ 
der the banner of the East. 

But the last and finest insight, the master-key to the 
records was still treasured in the East itself; somewhat 
of that insight has since been freely offered to us; on 
our ability to use it most probably depends the further 
insight that the future holds in promise. 


VHaog VKxy 


°1 Guiusz^vcriY dI j ) X l 


The Awakening to the Self 

T his awakening to the Self is recorded for those 
whose inner darkness has been worn away by strong 
effort, who has reached restfulness, from whom pas¬ 
sion has departed, who seek perfect Freedom. 

Among all causes, wisdom is the only cause of per¬ 
fect Freedom; as cookery without fire, so perfect Free¬ 
dom cannot be accomplished without wisdom. 

Works cannot destroy unwisdom, as these two are not 
contraries; but wisdom destroys unwisdom, as light the 
host of darkness. 

At first wrapped in unwisdom, when unwisdom is 
destroyed the pure Self shines forth of itself, like the 
radiant sun when the clouds have passed. 

When life that was darkened by unwisdom is made 
clear by the coming of wisdom, unwisdom sinks away 
of itself, as when water is cleared by astringent juice. 

This world is like a dream, crowded with loves and 
hates; in its own time it shines like a reality; but on 
awakening it becomes unreal. 

This passing world shines as real, like the silver 
imagined in a pearl-shell, as long as the Eternal is not 
known, the secondless substance of all. 

In the real conscious Self, the all-penetrating ever¬ 
lasting pervader, all manifested things exist, as all 
bracelets exist in gold. 

Just like the ether, the Lord of the senses, the Radi¬ 
ant, clothed in many vestures, seems divided because 


108 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


these are divided, but is beheld as one when the ves¬ 
tures are destroyed. 

Through this difference of vesture, race, name, and 
home are attributed to the Self, as difference of taste 
and color to pure water. 

Built up of fivefold-mingled elements through ac¬ 
cumulated works is the physical vesture, the place 
where pleasure and pain are tasted. 

Holding the five life-breaths, mind, reason, and the 
ten perceiving and acting powers, formed of unmingled 
elements, is the subtle vesture, the instrument of enjoy¬ 
ment. 

Formed through the beginningless, ineffable error of 
separateness, is the causal vesture. One should hold 
the Self to be different from these three vestures. 

In the presence of the five veils, the pure Self seems 
to share their nature; like a crystal in the presence of 
blue tissues. 

The pure Self within should be wisely discerned 
from the veils that surround it, as rice by winnowing, 
from husk and chaff. 

Though ever all-present, the Self is not everywhere 
clearly beheld; let it shine forth in pure reason like a 
reflection in a pure mirror. 

The thought of difference arises through the vestures, 
the powers, mind, reason, and nature; but one must 
find the Self, the witness of all this being, the perpetual 
king. 

Through the busy activity of the powers, the Self 
seems busy; as the moon seems to course through the 
coursing clouds. 


THE AWAKENING TO THE SELF 


109 


The vestures, powers, mind, and reason move in 
their paths under the pure consciousness of the Self, as 
people move in the sunshine. 

The qualities of vestures, powers, and works are at¬ 
tributed to the spotless Self through undiscernment, 
as blue to the pure sky. 

Through unwisdom, the mental vesture’s actorship 
is attributed to the Self, as the ripple of the waves to 
the moon reflected in a lake. 


Passion, desire, pleasure, pain move the mind; but 
when the mind rests in deep sleep they cease; they be¬ 
long to the mind, not to the Self. 

Shining is the sun’s nature; coldness, the water’s; 
heat, the fire’s; so the Self’s nature is Being, Conscious-^ 
ness, Bliss, perpetual spotlessness. 

The Self lends Being and Consciousness, and mind 
lends activity. When these two factors are joined to¬ 
gether by undiscernment, there arises the feeling that 


‘I perceive.’ 

The Self never changes; and mind of itself cannot 
perceive; but the Self through error believes itself to 
be the habitual doer and perceiver. 

The Self is believed to be the habitual life, as a rope 
is believed to be a snake; and thus fear arises. But 
when it is known that ‘I am not the habitual life but 


the Self’ then there can be no more fear. 




The Self alone lights up the mind and powers, as a 


s . 


flame lights up a jar. The Self can never be lit by these 
dull powers. 

In the knowledge of the Self, there is no need that 


110 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 

it should be known by anything else. A light does not 
need another light; it shines of itself. 

Putting all veils aside, saying ‘it is not this! it is not 
this!’ one must find the real unity of the habitual Self 
and the Supreme Self, according to the words of wisdom. 

All outward things, the vestures and the rest, spring 
from unwisdom; they are fugitive as bubbles. One 
must find the changeless, spotless ‘I am the Eternal.’ 

As I am other than these vestures, not mine are their 
birth, weariness, suffering, dissolution. I am not bound 
by sensuous objects, for Self is separate from the powers 
of sense. 

As I am other than mind, not mine are pain, rage, 
hate, and fear. The Self is above the outward life and 
mind, according to the words of wisdom. 

From this Self come forth the outward life and mind, 
and all the powers; from the Self come ether, air, fire, 
the waters, and earth upholder of all. 

Without quality or activity, everlasting, free from 
doubt, stainless, changeless, formless, ever free am I 
the spotless Self. 

Like ether, outside and inside all, I am unmoved; 
always all-equal, pure, unstained, spotless, unchanged. 

The ever-pure lonely one, the partless bliss, the sec- 
ondless, truth, wisdom, endless, the Supreme Eternal; 
this am I. 

Thus the steadily-held remembrance that ‘I am the 
Eternal’ takes away all unwisdom, as the healing es¬ 
sence stills all pain. 

In solitude, passionless, with powers well-ruled, let 


THE AWAKENING TO THE SELF 111 

him be intent on the one, the Self, with no thought but 
that endless one. 

The wise through meditation immersing all outward 
things in the Self, should be intent on that only Self, 
spotless as shining ether. 

Setting aside name, color, form, the insubstantial 
causes of separateness, the knower of the supreme 
rests in perfect Consciousness and Bliss. 

The difference between knower, knowing, and known 
exists not in the Self; for through its own Conscious¬ 
ness and Bliss it shines self-luminous. 

Thus setting the fire-stick of thought in the socket 
of the Self, let the kindled flame of knowledge burn 
away the fuel of unwisdom. 

By knowledge, as by dawn, the former darkness is 
driven away; then is manifest the Self, self-shining 
like the radiant sun. 

Yet the Self, though eternally possessed, is as though 
not possessed, through unwisdom. When unwisdom 
disappears, the Self shines forth like a jewel on one’s 
own throat. 

Separate life is conceived in the Eternal by error, as 
a man is imagined in a post. But the pain of separa¬ 
tion ceases when the truth about it is perceived. 

By entering into real nature, wisdom swiftly arises. 
Then the unwisdom of T and ‘mine’ disappears, as 
when a mistake about the position of north and south 
is set right. 

The seeker after union, possessed of all knowledge, 
sees with the eye of wisdom that all things rest in the 
Self; and this Self is the One, the All. 


112 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Self is all this moving world; other than Self is 
naught. As all jars are earth, so he beholds all as the 
Self. 

Perfect Freedom even in life is this, that a man should 
shake himself free from all the limits of his disguises, 
through the essence of Reality, Consciousness, Bliss, 
just as the grub becomes the bee. 

Crossing the ocean of glamor, and slaying the mon¬ 
sters, passion and hate, the seeker for union, perfect 
in peace, grows luminous in the garden of the Self. 

Free from bondage to outward, unlasting pleasures, 
and returning to the joy of the Self, he shines pure 
within like the flame in a lamp. 

Even when hidden under disguises, let the Sage stand 
free from them, like pure ether. Though knowing all, 
let him be as though he knew nothing; moving un¬ 
trammelled like the air. 

Let the Sage, shaking off his disguises, merge him¬ 
self utterly in the all-pervading One; as water in water, 
ether in ether, flame in flame. 

The gain above all gains, the joy above all joys, the 
wisdom above all wisdoms; let him affirm that it is the 
Eternal. 

When this is seen, there is no more to see; when this 
is attained, there is no more to attain; when this is 
known, there is no more to know; — let him affirm that 
this is the Eternal. 

Upward, downward, on all sides perfect; Being, Con¬ 
sciousness, Bliss; the secondless, endless, everlasting 
One; — let him affirm that this is the Eternal. 

Through the knowledge that nothing is but the Eter- 


THE AWAKENING TO THE SELF 


113 


nal, the unchanging One is beheld by the wise; the 
aboriginal, partless joy; let him affirm that this is the 
Eternal. 

As partakers in the bliss of that partless, blissful 
One, the Evolver and all the powers enjoy their bliss 
as dependents. 

Every being is bound to the Eternal; every movement 
follows the Eternal; the all-embracing Eternal is in all, 
as curd is in all milk. 

Nor small nor great nor short nor long, nor born nor 
departing, without form, attribute, color, name; — let 
him affirm that this is the Eternal. 

Through whose shining shine the sun and all lights; 
but who shines not by any’s light; through whom all 
this shines; — let him affirm that this is the Eternal. 

All present within and without, making luminous all 
this moving, the Eternal shines forth glowing of red- 
hot iron. 

The Eternal is different from the moving world — 
yet other than the Eternal is naught! What is other 
than the Eternal shines insubstantial, like the mirage 
in the desert. 

Things seen and heard are not other than the Eter¬ 
nal. Knowledge of reality teaches that all this is the 
Eternal, the Being, Consciousness, Bliss, the secondless. 

The eye of wisdom beholds the ever-present Con¬ 
sciousness, Bliss, the Self, the eye of unwisdom beholds 
not, as the blind beholds not the shining sun. 

The personal life, refined through and through by 
the fire of wisdom, which right learning and knowledge 
kindle, shines pure as gold, freed from every stain. 


114 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


The Self, rising in the firmament of the heart — sun 
of wisdom, darkness-dispersing, all-present, all-support¬ 
ing — shines forth and illumines all. 

He who, drawing away from space and time, faith¬ 
fully worships in the holy place of the divine Self — 
the ever-present, the destroyer of heat and cold and 
every limit, the stainless, eternally happy — he all¬ 
knowing, entering the All, becomes immortal. 

(Thus the Awakening to the Self is completed.) 


Awakening to Reality 


Tattva Bodha 


Sankara’s Catechism 

Introductory by Charles Johnston 

I n the “Awakening to the Self,” and, still more, in the 
“Crest Jewel of Wisdom,” Sankara the Teacher uses 
many words in a clear, precise, and consciously exact 
sense, which is not always to be gathered from the con¬ 
text of these two works. In the “Awakening to the 
Self,” this is hardly an impediment, as the expression 
of this excellent poem is so perfect and universal; nor is 
there any great impediment in the first part of the 
“Crest Jewel of Wisdom,” which has been translated 
under the title “First Steps on the Path.” But further 
on in the “Crest Jewel,” this is not the case. It becomes 
more strict and technical in meaning; and without 
precise definitions, much is hardly intelligible. But 
in the “Crest Jewel” itself these definitions are not al¬ 
ways to be found. What is to be done then, if we really 
want to understand the Teacher precisely? 

Happily Sankara has left us a Key in his own work, 
the “Awakening to Reality,” where nearly every spe¬ 
cial word of his philosophy is exactly defined. We have 
only to try to find the best English translation of his 
definitions, and we shall have a clear clue and outline 
to the larger work, the “Crest Jewel,” and, indeed, to 
the whole of Sankara’s philosophy. 

One thing must be remembered. This “Awakening 
to Reality” is what we have called it — a catechism. 
And in a catechism we can hardly expect the perfect 


118 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


poetical form and splendid imagery of works like the 
“Awakening to the Self.” What we shall find, is lu¬ 
cidity, accuracy, grasp, coherence; but not poetical 
beauty. Thus is begun: 

The Awakening to Reality 

I 

ryio the Master, the World-Soul, the Master of seekers 
A for union, obeisance; to the teacher, the giver of 
wisdom. To fulfill love for those who would be free, 
this Awakening to Reality is addressed to them. 

The Four Perfections 

We shall tell of the way of discerning reality, the per¬ 
fection of freedom, for those who are fitted by possess¬ 
ing the Four Perfections. 

What are the Four Perfections? 

— The Discerning between lasting and unlasting 
things; No Rage for enjoying the fruit of works, either 
here or there; the Six Graces that follow Peace; and 
then the Longing to be free. 

What is the Discerning between lasting and .unlasting 
things? 

— The one lasting thing is the Eternal; all, apart 
from it, is unlasting. 

What is No Rage? 

— A lack of longing for enjoyments here and in the 
heaven-world. 

What is possession of the Perfections that follow 
Peace? 


THE AWAKENING TO REALITY 


119 


— Peace; Self-Control; Steadiness; Sturdiness; Con¬ 
fidence; Intentness. 

What is Peace? 

— A firm hold on emotion. 

What is Self-Control? 

— A firm hold on the lust of the eyes and the out¬ 
ward powers. 

What is Steadiness? 

— A following out of one’s own genius. 

What is Sturdiness? 

— A readiness to bear opposing forces, like cold and 
heat, pleasure and pain. 

What is Confidence? 

— Confidence is a reliance on the Voice of the Teacher 
and Final Wisdom. 

What is Intentness? 

— One-pointedness of the imagination. 

What is the Longing to be free? 

— It is the longing: “That Freedom may be mine.” 

The Discerning of Reality 

These are the Four Perfections. Through these, 
men are fitted to discern Reality. 

What is the Discerning of Reality? 

— It is this: the Self is real; other than it, all is 
fancy. 

Self, Vestures, Veils, Modes 

What is the Self? 

— He who stands apart from the Physical, the Emo¬ 
tional, and the Causal Vestures; who is beyond the five 


120 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Veils; who is witness of the three Modes; whose own 
nature is Being, Consciousness, Bliss — this is the 
Self. 

The Three Vestures 

What is the Physical Vesture? 

— Being formed of the five creatures fivefolded, born 
through works, it is the house where opposing forces 
like pleasure and pain are enjoyed; having these six 
accidents: it is, is born, grows, turns the corner, de¬ 
clines, perishes; such is the Physical Vesture. 

What is the Emotional Vesture? 

— Being formed of the five creatures not fivefolded, 
born through works, the perfection of the enjoyment of 
opposing forces like pleasure and pain, existing with 
its seventeen phases: the five powers of knowing; the 
five powers of doing; the five lives; emotion, one; the 
soul, one; this is the Emotional Vesture. 

The five powers of knowing are: Hearing, Touch, 
Sight, Taste, Smell. Hearing’s radiation is Space; 
Touch’s, Air; Sight’s, the S.un; Smell’s, the Twin Phy¬ 
sicians; these are the powers of knowing. 

Hearing’s business is the seizing of sounds; Touch’s 
business, the seizing of contacts; Sight’s business, the 
seizing of forms; Taste’s business, the seizing of tastes; 
Smell’s business, the seizing of odors. 

The five powers of doing are: Voice, Plands, Feet, 
Putting-forth, Generating. Voice’s radiation is the 
Tongue of Flame; Hands’, the Master; Feet’s, the Per- 
vader; Putting-forth’s, Death; Generating’s, the Lord 


THE AWAKENING TO REALITY 


121 


of Beings; thus the radiations of the powers of doing. 

Voice’s business is speaking; Hands’ business is grasp¬ 
ing things; Feet’s business is going; Putting-forth’s 
business is removing waste; Generating’s business is 
physical enjoying. 

What is the Causal Vesture? 

— Being formed through ineffable, beginningless 
unwisdom, it is the Substance and Cause of the two 
Vestures; though unknowing as to its own nature, it 
is yet in nature unerring; this is the Causal Vesture. 

The Three Modes 

What are the Three Modes? 

— The Modes of Waking, Dreaming, Dreamlessness. 

What is the Mode, Waking? 

— It is where knowledge comes through Hearing and 
the other knowing powers, whose business is sound and 
the other perceptions; this is the Waking Mode. 

When attributing itself to the Physical Vesture, the 
Self is called the Pervading. 

Then what is the Mode, Dreaming? 

— The world that presents itself in rest, generated 
by impressions of what has been seen and heard in the 
Mode, Waking, is the Mode, Dreaming. 

When attributing itself to the Emotional Vesture, 
the Self is called the Radiant. 

What then is the Mode, Dreamlessness? 

— The sense that I perceive outwardly nothing at 
all, that rest is joyfully enjoyed by me, this is the Mode, 
Dreamlessness. 


122 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


When attributing itself to the Causal Vesture, the 
Self is called the Intuitional. 

The Five Veils 

What are the Five Veils? 

— The Food-formed; the Life-formed; the Emotion- 
formed; the Knowledge-formed; the Bliss-formed. 

What is the Food-formed? 

— Coming into being through the essence of food, 
getting its growth through the essence of food, in the 
food-formed world it is again dispersed, this is the 
Food-formed Veil — the Physical Vesture. 

What is the Life-formed? 

— The Forward-life and the four other Lives, Voice 
and the four other powers of doing; these are the Life- 
formed. 

What is the Emotion-formed Veil? 

— Emotion, joining itself to the five powers of know¬ 
ing — this is the Emotion-formed Veil. 

What is the Knowledge-formed? 

— The Soul, joining itself to the five powers of know¬ 
ing — this is the Knowledge-formed Veil. 

What is the Bliss-formed? 

— This verily is the Substance not quite pure be¬ 
cause of the unwisdom that gives birth to the Causal 
Vesture; in it are founded all joys; this is the Bliss- 
formed Veil. 

Thus the Five Veils. 

By saying: “Mine are the lives; mine is emotion; 
mine is the soul; mine is the wisdom”; these are recog¬ 
nized as possessions. And just as a bracelet, a neck- 


THE AWAKENING TO REALITY 


123 


lace, a house and such things separated from one’s self, 
are recognized as possessions, so the Five Veils and the 
Vestures, recognized as possessions, are not the Self 
(the Possessor). 

What then, is the Self? 

— It is that whose own-nature is Being, Conscious¬ 
ness, Bliss. 

What is Being? 

— What stands through the Three Times (Present, 
Past, Future) — this is Being. 

What is Consciousness? 

— The own-nature of Perceiving. 

What is Bliss? 

— The own-nature of Joy. 

Thus let a man know that the own-nature of his own 
Self is Being, Consciousness, Bliss. 

Explanatory by Charles Johnston 

This “Awakening to Reality” is a summary of an 
intuition of the world, a solution of the universe. Only 
those who have certain mental and moral endowments 
are ripe for the understanding of such a solution of the 
world. Briefly, these endowments are: wisdom and 
will. The solution reached is — the real Self of every 
man is the Eternal. This Self is inwardly beginning¬ 
less, endless, immortal. But outwardly it becomes 
manifest as three lesser selves, each with its own ves¬ 
ture, its own world. 

Lowest of these is the physical self, the “Pervading”; 
with its physical Vesture, in the Waking world. 


124 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Next, the emotional self, the “Radiant,” with its 
emotional Vesture, in the Dreaming world. 

Highest, the causal self, the “Intuitional,” with its 
causal Vesture, in the Dreamless world. It has exis¬ 
tence apart from the Eternal, owing only to the thin 
veil of illusion, which hides the identity of the One with 
the All. Thus, as to its own nature, it is unknowing; 
for, while believing itself One, it is really All. But for 
all other things it is unerring, for its close proximity 
to, and real oneness with, the Eternal, give it the inner 
sense of the trueness of things that is all wisdom. This 
is “the Seer who ordained all fitly through the ages.” 

In the Physical Vesture adheres one Veil; in the 
Emotional Vesture three — the vital, the emotional, 
the moral; — in the Causal, again one. 

There is a great difficulty in finding a fit word for 
the term we have translated “radiation.” What is 
meant is the power — personified, almost personal — 
conceived to be the “regent” or “deity” of the field in 
which each mode of perception and action finds its ex¬ 
pansion. A closely analogous phrase would be, for in¬ 
stance, “the Prince of the Powers of the Air,” who 
would thus be the “regent” or “deity” of the powers of 
touch, and, in morals, the “lusts of the flesh.” 

This is, of course, mythology: a mythical represen¬ 
tation of an actual truth, very difficult to represent 
otherwise than mythologically. 

But in the conclusion of the matter there is no diffi¬ 
culty. It is, that a man shall know the own-nature of 
his own Self to be Being, Consciousness, Bliss; or, in 
other words, Eternal, Wisdom, Love. 


THE AWAKENING TO REALITY 


125 


II 

We shall speak now of the way the four-and-twenty 
natures are developed. 

The Primitive Seven 

Dwelling together with the Evolver in glamor, who 
is the very self of the three potencies: substance, force, 
and space. 

From this glamor, shining ether came forth. 

From shining ether, breath came forth. 

From breath, fire came forth. 

From fire, the waters came forth. 

From the waters, earth came forth. 

Their Substantial Parts 

Now, among these five natures: 

From the substantial part of shining ether, the power 
of hearing came forth. 

From the substantial part of breath, the power of 
touch came forth. 

From the substantial part of fire, the power of seeing 
came forth. 

From the substantial part of the waters, the power 
of taste came forth. 

From the substantial part of earth, the power of 
smelling came forth. 

From the united substantial parts of these five na¬ 
tures, the inner powers — mind, soul, self-assertion, 
imagination — came forth. 


126 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Mind is the very self of intending and doubting. 

Soul is the very self of affirmation. 

Self-assertion is the very self of attributing selfhood. 

Imagination is the very self of image-making. 

The regent of mind is the Moon. 

The regent of soul is the Evolver. 

The regent of self-assertion is the Transformer. 

The regent of imagination is the Pervader. 

Their Forceful Parts 

Now, among these five natures: 

From the forceful part of shining ether, the power of 
voice came forth. 

From the forceful part of breath, the power of hand¬ 
ling came forth. 

From the forceful part of fire, the power of moving 
came forth. 

From the forceful part of the waters, the power of 
engendering came forth. 

From the forceful part of earth, the power of extrud¬ 
ing came forth. 

From the united forceful parts of these natures, the 
five lives — the upward-life, the forward-life, the unit- 
ing-life, the distributing-life, the downward-life — came 
forth. 

Their Spatial Parts 

Of these five natures, from their spatial parts, the 
five-folded five elements come forth. 

What is this five-folding? 

It is this: taking the spatial parts of the five primi- 


THE AWAKENING TO REALITY 


127 


tive natures — one part of each — these parts are 
each first divided in two; then one half of each part is 
left alone, on one side, while the other halves of each 
are each divided into four. Then to the half of each 
nature, is joined the fourth of the half [the eighth] of 
each of the other natures. And thus five-folding is 
made. 

From these five primitive natures, thus five-folded, 
the physical vesture is formed. Hence the essential 
unity between the clod and the Evolving Egg. 

The Life and the Lord 

There is an image of the Eternal, which attributes 
itself to the vestures, and is called the Life. And this 
Life, through the power of Nature, regards the Lord as 
separate from itself. 

When wearing the disguise of Unwisdom, the Self 
is called the Life. 

When wearing the disguise of Glamor, the Self is 
called the Lord. 

Thus, through the difference of their disguises, there 
is an appearance of difference between the Life and the 
Lord. And as long as this appearance of difference con¬ 
tinues, so long will the revolving world of birth and death 
continue. For this reason the idea of the difference 
between the Life and the Lord is not to be admitted. 

But how can the idea of unity between the self- 
assertive, little-knowing Life, and the selfless, all-know¬ 
ing Lord, be accepted, according to the famous words, 
that thou art; since the genius of these two, the Life 
and the Lord, is so opposite? 


128 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


This is not really so; for ‘Life attributing itself to 
the physical and emotional vestures’ is only the verbal 
meaning of thou; while the real meaning of thou is 
‘pure Consciousness, bare of all disguises, in dreamless 
life.’ 

And so ‘the Lord full of omniscience and power’ is 
but the verbal meaning of that; while the real meaning 
of that is ‘pure Consciousness stripped of disguises.’ 

Thus there is no contradiction in the unity of the Life 
and the Lord, since both are pure Consciousness. 

The Free-in-Life 

And thus all beings in whom the idea of the eternal 
has been developed, through the words of wisdom and 
the true Teacher, are Free-in-life. 

Who is Free-in-life? 

Just as there is the firm belief that ‘I am the body,’ 
'I am a man,’ ‘I am a priest,’ ‘I am a serf,’ so he who 
possesses the firm conviction that ‘I am neither priest 
nor serf nor man, but stainless Being, Consciousness, 
Bliss, the Shining, the inner Master, Shining Wisdom,’ 
and knows this by direct perception, he is Free-in-life. 

The Three Modes of Deeds 

Thus by the direct knowledge that ‘I am the Eternal,’ 
he is freed from all the bonds of his deeds. 

How many modes of these ‘deeds’ are there? If 
counted as ‘deeds to come,’ ‘deeds accumulated,’ and 
‘deeds entered on,’ there are three modes. 

The pure and impure deeds that are done by the body 


THE AWAKENING TO REALITY 


129 


of the wise, after wisdom is won, are called ‘deeds to 
come.’ 

And what of ‘deeds accumulated’? The deeds that 
are waiting to be done, sprung from seeds sown in 
endless myriads of births, are ‘deeds accumulated.’ 

And what are ‘deeds entered on’? The deeds that 
give joy and sorrow here in the world, in this vesture, 
are ‘deeds entered on.’ Through experiencing them 
they reach cessation; for the using-up of deeds entered 
on comes through experiencing them. And ‘deeds ac¬ 
cumulated’ reach cessation through wisdom, the very 
self of certainty that ‘I am the Eternal.’ ‘Deeds to 
come’ also reach cessation through wisdom. For, as 
water is not bound to the lotus-leaf, so ‘deeds to come’ 
are not bound to the wise. 

For those who praise and love and honor the wise, 
to them come the pure ‘deeds to come’ of the wise. And 
those who blame and hate and attack the wise, to them 
come all the unspeakable deeds, whose very self is im¬ 
purity, of the wise man’s ‘deeds to come.’ 

The End 

Then the Knower of the Self, crossing over the cir¬ 
cling world, even here enjoys the bliss of the Eternal. 
As the sacred books say: The Knower of the Self 
crosses over sorrow. 

And the sacred traditions say: Whether he leave his 
mortal form in Benares or in a dog-keeper’s hut, if he 
has gained wisdom, he is free, his limitations laid aside. 

Thus the Awakening to Reality is completed. 


Sankara's Catecliism 

Explanatory by Charles Johnston 

I n the first part of Sankara’s Catechism, previously 
translated, the most valuable thing is the teaching 
of the sevenfold man, who is really a modified unity 
appearing in seven modes. The only real and eternal 
element in the sevenfold man — for real and eternal 
are, for Sankara, synonymous terms — is the perfect 
Self, which is one with the Eternal. In manifestation 
this Self appears in three degrees: the intuitional self, 
the emotional self, the physical self; and, for each of 
these there is a vesture suited to its nature. Thus the 
divine Self, with its three degrees, and their three ves¬ 
tures, make up the perfect seven. 

The three lesser degrees of the Self are its representa¬ 
tives in the three manifest worlds: the spiritual world, 
the middle world, the physical world. And, very na¬ 
turally, the middle world partakes in some degree of the 
nature of the other two; so that its highest layer is 
touched with the nature of the spiritual world, while its 
lowest layer is touched with the nature of the physical 
world. 

This threefold nature of the middle world finds its 
counterpart in the three veils which make up the ves¬ 
ture of the middle self, which we have called the emo¬ 
tional self as perhaps the best description of its total 
nature. 

The three veils of the middle self are the vital veil, 


EXPLANATORY 


131 


the sensuous veil, and the intellectual veil; and the re¬ 
gents of the last two are ‘mind’ and ‘soul,’ as we have 
translated the original terms — Manas and Buddhi. 

Development takes place, therefore, by the gradually 
raising of the self through these vestures and veils; so 
that, having begun as the physical self in pure animal 
life, it gradually becomes the emotional and intellectual 
self of human life, then the intuitional self of life that 
is something more than human, and at last realizes it¬ 
self as the eternal Self which is one with the Eternal. 

To this, the first part of the Catechism, is then added 
the outline of Sankara’s idealistic physics, the doctrine 
of the three potencies of substance, force, space; or, 
as one might call it, from a different point of view, the 
three modes of subject, predicate, object: of the knower, 
the knowing, the known. And as perception is of five 
types, the subject, predicate, and object are divided 
into the five types of sensuous perception. But as the 
objects of sensuous perception are not simple, but each 
respond to several different sensations, a description is 
found for this fact in the ‘process of five-folding’ of the 
object. As an example, a piece of camphor responds 
not only to the sense of sight but to other senses, touch, 
taste, smell; it is therefore conceived as made up of the 
five natures that are objects of sensuous perception, 
so mingled that one nature is dominant. The three 
potencies and the five natures are the three vestures and 
the five veils, from another point of view. 

Very important are the definitions: ‘mind’ is the pow¬ 
er of intending and doubting; ‘soul’ is the power of 
affirmation; the latter approaching the intuitional self 


132 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


which is the ‘enlightened spiritual will.’ To express in 
terms of morals this psychological analysis, we may 
say that at first through the power of self-assertion, 
the idea of selfhood is falsely attributed to the physi¬ 
cal body and its animal nature, and then to the mental 
picture of the physical body, which is the emotional 
self or lower personality. The task of regeneration, of 
initiating true life, consists in first checking this false 
self-assertion — selfishness and sensuality — and then 
through the stages of ‘intending and doubting’ and 
strong ‘affirmation’ substituting for the lower personal¬ 
ity the enlightened spiritual will, which is the direct ex¬ 
pression of the real Self, re-becoming the Eternal. 

Then this chapter of physics and psychology is fol¬ 
lowed by one of metaphysics. There is the real Self, 
which is the Eternal. But we do not realize our life as 
that real Self. Why do we not realize it? Because of 
two errors, or illusions, which make up the double 
‘heresy of separateness.’ The first error is the error of 
our apartness from the Eternal. The second error is 
the error of our apartness from each other. The re¬ 
moval of these two errors constitutes ‘our duty towards 
God’ and ‘our duty towards our neighbor’; in both cases 
the real gain is our own, is the gain of our real Self. 

Sankara calls the first error glamor; the second, un¬ 
wisdom. The picture of the self formed through the 
first is the Lord; the picture of the self formed through 
the second is the Life. And the real nature of both is 
the same — pure consciousness — though there is a 
verbal difference, a difference of definition, between 
them.. 


EXPLANATORY 


133 


Then, in conclusion, the three forms of ‘deeds’ or 
Karma. We may compare ‘accumulated deeds’ to 
capital; ‘deeds entered on,’ to interest; and ‘deeds to 
come,’ to the earnings of an unselfish man for the good 
of others. And we must remember that each of these 
has a debit as well as a credit side. 

The real value of this little treatise is as a key and 
outline of longer and more complicated works; yet it 
has a high excellence of its own. 


The Tss ence of the Teachi 


mg 


Vakya Sudha, or Bala Bodiiani 


The Essence of tke Teaching 


Seer and Seen 


he form is seen, the eye is seer; the mind is both 



seen and seer. The changing moods of mind are 
seen, but the witnessing Self, the seer, is never seen. 

The eye, remaining one, beholds varying forms; as, 
blue and yellow, coarse and fine, short and long; and 
differences such as these. 

The mind, remaining one, forms definite intentions, 
even while the character of the eye varies, as in blind¬ 
ness, dullness, or keen-sightedness; and this holds also 
of hearing and touch. 

The conscious Self, remaining one, shines on all the 
moods of mind: on desire, determination, doubt, faith, 
un faith, firmness and the lack of it, shame, insight, 
fear, and such as these. 

This conscious Self rises not, nor has its setting, nor 
does it come to wax or wane; unhelped, it shines itself, 
and illumines others also. [5] 


The Personal Idea 


This illumining comes when the ray of consciousness 
enters the thinking mind; and the thinking mind itself 
is of twofold nature. The one part of it is the personal 
idea; the other part is mental action. 

The ray of consciousness and the personal idea are 
blended together, like the heat and the hot iron ball. 
As the personal idea identifies itself with the body, it 
brings that also a sense of consciousness. 

The personal idea is blended with the ray of con- 


138 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


sciousness, the body, and the witnessing Self, respec¬ 
tively — through the action of innate necessity, of 
works, and of delusion. 

Since the two are bound up together, the innate blend¬ 
ing of the personal idea with the ray of consciousness 
never ceases; but its blending with the body ceases, 
when the works wear out; and with the witnessing Self, 
through illumination. 

When the personal idea melts away in deep sleep, 
the body also loses its sense of consciousness. The per¬ 
sonal idea is only half expanded in dream, while in 
waking it is complete. [10] 

The power of mental action, when the ray of con¬ 
sciousness has entered into union with it, builds up 
mind-images in the dream-state; and external objects, 
in the waking state. 

The personal form, thus brought into being by the 
personal idea and mental action, is of itself quite life¬ 
less. It appears in the three modes of consciousness; 
it is born, and so also dies. 

The Powers of Glamor 

For the world-glamor has two powers — extension 
and limitation, or enveloping. The power of extension 
brings into manifestation the whole world, from the 
personal form to the universal cosmos. 

This manifesting is an attributing of name and form 
to the Reality — which is Being, Consciousness, Bliss, 
the Eternal; it is like foam on the water. 

The inner division between the seer and the seen, and 
the outer division between the Eternal and the world, 


THE ESSENCE OF THE TEACHING 


139 


are concealed by the other power, limitation; and this 
also is the cause of the cycle of birth and death. [IS] 

The light of the witnessing Self is united with the 
personal form; from this entering in of the ray of con¬ 
sciousness arises the habitual life — the ordinary self. 

The isolated existence of the ordinary self is attri¬ 
buted to the witnessing Self, and appears to belong to 
it; but when the power of limitation is destroyed, and 
the difference appears, the sense of isolation in the 
Self vanishes away. 

It is the same power which conceals the difference 
between the Eternal and the visible world; and, by its 
power, the Eternal appears subject to change. 

But when this power of limitation is destroyed, the 
difference between the Eternal and the visible world 
becomes clear; change belongs to the visible world, and 
by no means to the Eternal. 

The five elements of existence are these: being, shin¬ 
ing, enjoying, form and name; the three first belong to 
the nature of the Eternal; the last two, to the nature of 
the visible world. [20] 

In the elements — ether, air, fire, water, earth; in 
creatures — gods, animals, and men, Being, Conscious¬ 
ness, Bliss are undivided; the division is only of name 
and form. 

Six Steps of Soul Vision 

Therefore setting aside this division through name 
and form, and concentrating himself on Being, Con¬ 
sciousness, Bliss, which are undivided, let him follow 
after soul-vision perpetually, first inwardly in the heart, 
and then in outward things also. 


140 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Soul-vision is either fluctuating or unwavering; this 
is its two-fold division in the heart. Fluctuating soul- 
vision is again two-fold; it ma}r consist either in things 
seen or heard. 

This is the fluctuating soul-vision which consists in 
things seen: a meditating on consciousness as being 
merely the witness of the desires and passions that fill 
the mind. 

This is the fluctuating soul-vision which consists in 
things heard: the constant thought that “I am the self, 
which is unattached, Being, Consciousness, Bliss, self- 
shining, secondless.” [ 25 ] 

The forgetting of all images and words, through en¬ 
tering into the bliss of direct experience — this is un¬ 
wavering soul-vision, like a lamp set in a windless place. 

Then, corresponding to the first, there is the soul- 
vision which strips off name and form from the element 
of pure Being, in everything whatever; now accom¬ 
plished outwardly, as it was before, in the heart. 

And, corresponding to the second is the soul-vision 
which consists in the unbroken thought, that the Real 
is a single undivided Essence, whose character is Be¬ 
ing, Consciousness, Bliss. 

Corresponding to the former third, is that steady being, 
is the tasting of this Essence for oneself. Let him fill the 
time by following out these, the six stages of soul-vision. 

When the false conceit, that the body is the Self, 
falls away; when the Self supreme is known; then, 
whithersoever the mind is directed, there will the pow¬ 
ers of soul-vision arise. [ 30 ] 

The knot of the heart is loosed; all doubts are cut; 


THE ESSENCE OF THE TEACHING 


141 


all bondage to works wither away — when That is 
known, which is the first and the last. 

The Three Selves 

The individual self appears in three degrees: as a 
limitation of the Self; as a ray of the conscious Self; 
and, thirdly, as the self imagined in dreams. The first 
alone is real. 

For the limitation in the individual self is a mere 
imagination; and that which is supposed to be limited 
is the Reality. The idea of isolation in the individual 
self is only an error; but its identity with the Eternal 
is its real nature. 

And that song they sang of “That thou art” is for 
the first of these three selves alone; it only is one with 
the perfect Eternal, not the other selves. 

The power of world-glamor, existing in the Eternal, 
has two potencies: extension and limitation. Through 
the power of limitation, Glamor hides the undivided 
nature of the Eternal, and so builds up the images of 
the individual self and the world. [35] 

The individual self which comes into being when the 
ray of consciousness enters the thinking mind, is the 
self that gains experience and performs works. The 
whole world, with all its elements and beings, is the ob¬ 
ject of its experience. 

These two, the individual self and its world, were be¬ 
fore time began; they last till Freedom comes, making 
up our habitual life. Hence they are called the habi¬ 
tual self and world. 

In this ray of consciousness, the dream-power exists, 


142 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


with, its two potencies of extension and limitation. 
Through the power of limitation, it hides the former self 
and world, and so builds up a new self and a new world. 

As this new self and world are real only so long as their 
appearance lasts, they are called the imaginary self and 
the imaginary world. For, when one has awakened from 
the dream, the dream existence never comes back again. 

The imaginary self believes its imaginary world to be 
real; but the habitual self knows that world to be only 
mythical, as also is the imaginary self. 

The habitual self looks on its habitual world as real; 
but the real Self knows that the habitual world is only 
mythical, as also is the habitual self. 

The real Self knows its real oneness with the Eternal; 
it sees nothing but the Eternal, yet sees that what seemed 
the unreal is also the Self. 

Freedom and Final Peace 

As the sweetness, the flowing, and the coldness, that 
are the characteristics of the water, reappear in the 
wave, and so in the foam that crests the wave; 

So, verily, the Being, Consciousness, and Bliss of 
the witnessing Self enter into the habitual self that is 
bound up with it; and, by the door of the habitual self, 
enter into the imaginary self also. 

But when the foam melts away, its flowing, sweet¬ 
ness, coldness, all sink back into the wave; and when 
the wave itself comes to rest, they sink back to the sea. 

When the imaginary self melts away, its Being, Con¬ 
sciousness, Bliss sink back into the habitual self; and, 
when the habitual self comes to rest, they return to the 
Self supreme, the witness of all. 


The 


Teachings of Sankara 

by Charles Johnston 


I 


Tlie Teacli in^s of Sankara 

Extradition, our best guide in many of the dark prob- 
J- lems of India’s past, attributes the admirable philo¬ 
sophical work we have just translated to Sankaracharya, 
the greatest name in the history of Indian Philosophy, 
and one of the greatest masters of pure thought the 
world has ever seen. 

Sankara, again according to the tradition of the East, 
lived and taught some two thousand years ago, founding 
three colleges of Sanskrit learning and philosophy, the 
most important being at Sringeri, in southern India. 
He wrote Commentaries on the older Vedanta books, 
and many original works of great excellence, of which 
this is reckoned to be one. 

Like all Sankara’s separate works, The Essence of 
the Teaching is complete in itself, containing a survey 
of the whole of life, from a single standpoint; in the 
present case, from the point of view of pure intellect. 

The moral problem before us, is the liberation of our 
souls from the idea of personality; and the opening of 
the door to the life of the universal Self, which will 
enter our hearts, and rule them, once the personal idea 
is put out of the way. And there is no more potent 
weapon for combating the personal idea than the clear 
and lucid understanding that what we call our person¬ 
ality is, in reality, only one of many pictures in the 
mind, a picture of the body, held before our conscious¬ 
ness, viewed by it, and therefore external to it. If 
the personality is a picture in the field of consciousness, 
it cannot be consciousness itself; cannot be our real 


146 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


self; but must necessarily be unreal and transient. 

We are the ray of consciousness, and not the image 
of the body which it lights up, and which, thus lit up, 
we call our personality. And here we come to one point 
of the highest interest, in the present work: its central 
ideas anticipate, almost in the same words, the most 
original teachings of German philosophy. Hence a right 
understanding of it will bridge over one of the chasms 
between the East and the West, the remote past and 
the life of today; thus showing, once more, that the 
mind of man is everywhere the same; that there is but 
one Soul making itself manifest throughout all history. 

It may be enough, here, to point out that German 
philosophy — the teaching of Kant, as developed by 
Schopenhauer — regards each individual as a mani¬ 
festation of the universal Will, a ray of that Will, fallen 
into manifestation, under the influence of the tendency 
called the will-towards-life. 

This individualized ray of the universal Will, falling 
into the intellect, becomes thereby subject to the pow¬ 
ers which make for manifestation, and which Kant 
analyzed as Causality, Time, and Space. For Kant 
has shown, with admirable cogency and lucidity, that 
these so solid-seeming realities are not real at all, but 
were forms of our thought; mere figments of our in¬ 
tellects. What we call manifestation, Schopenhauer 
calls representation; and he has very fully developed the 
idea of the Universe as the resultant of the universal 
Will, manifested through these three forms of represen¬ 
tation — Causality, Time, and Space. 

Now it is quite clear that he calls Universal Will what 


THE TEACHINGS OF SANKARA 


147 


Sankara, following the Upanishads, calls the Eternal; 
and that the forms of representation of Schopenhauer’s 
system, correspond to the World-glamor, or Maya, of 
Indian thought. And it is further clear that the will- 
toward-life, or desire for sensuous existence, of the one 
system, is very close to the personal idea, or egotism, 
of the other. 

Whoever is acquainted with the two systems, can point 
out a further series of analogies; we shall content our¬ 
selves with alluding to one. Schopenhauer taught that 
our salvation lies in denying the personal and selfish will- 
toward-life, within ourselves, and allowing the Universal 
Will to supersede it; — the very teaching which lies at 
the heart of Indian thought: the supersession of the in¬ 
dividual self by the Self universal, the Self of all beings. 

To turn now from the purely intellectual, to the 
moral side of the matter. If we consider it well, and 
watch the working of the powers of life we find within us, 
we shall see that all our misery and futility come from 
this very source, the personal idea — the vanity and 
selfishness of our own personalities, coming into strife 
with the equally vain and selfish personalities of others. 

There is not an evil that cannot be traced to this 
fertile source. Sensuality, for' example, with all its 
attendant crime and pain, is built on two forces, both 
springing from the personal idea: first, the desire for 
the stimulus of strong sensation, to keep the sense of 
the separate, isolated self keen and vivid; and then the 
vanity and foolish admiration of our personal selves, as 
possessors of such abundant means of gratification. An¬ 
other evil, the lust of possessions, is of the same brood; 


148 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


arid, curiously enough, the root of it is — fear; the cow¬ 
ering fear of the personal self, before the menacing forces 
of the world; the desperate, and — infallible accompani¬ 
ment of cowardice — remorselessly cruel determination 
to build up a triple rampart of possessions between the 
personality and the mutability of things. The whole 
cause of the race for wealth, the cursed hunger for gold, 
is a fearful and poltroon longing for security, protection 
for the personal self; .which, indeed, as a mere web of 
dreams and fancies, is in very bad need of protection. 

The last evil, ambition, which is only vanity grown 
up, is so manifestly of the same color with the others 
that no special indication of the fact is needed. Thus 
we see what an immense part of human life, and that, 
the most futile and pitiable part of it, is built up on so 
slight a foundation: the wholly mythical personality, 
the web of dreams, the mere image of a body, itself 
unreal, which has usurped a sort of sovereignty over 
all the powers of our wills and minds. 

The whole problem for us is this, and it is one that 
recurs in every moment of life: to disperse this web of 
dreams which we call our personality, and so to let the 
pure and universal Will pour into our hearts, to follow 
out its own excellent purposes, and manifest its own 
beneficent powers. And thus we shall for the first time 
enter into our inheritance; no longer as shadowy and 
malevolent sprites, raging between earth and heaven, a 
sorrow to the angels, a mockery to the fiends; but rather 
as undivided parts of the great soul of humanity; of 
that universal Self, whose own nature is perfect Being, 
perfect Consciousness, perfect Bliss. 


1 


The Song of the Self 


Siddhanta-Tattva-Vindu 


Tlie Son^ of the Self 

\TOR earth nor water, fire nor liquid air, 

Nor ether, nor the powers, nor these in one; 
Undifferentiated, in dreamless perfect rest, 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Nor castes nor their divisions, rite nor rule, 

Are mine, nor fixing mind and thought and mood; 

No longer dreaming things not Self art T and ‘mine,’ 
That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Nor mother, father, nor the gods and worlds, 

Nor Scriptures, offerings, shrines are there, they say, 
In dreamlessness abandoned by the lonely Self; 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Nor sectary of Cause or Lord or Life 
Knows That, nor follower of Saint or Rite, 

In perfect union, pure of all but Self, 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Nor upward, downward, nor within, without; 

Nor midward, backward, That, nor east nor west; 
All-present everywhere in partless unity, 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Nor white nor black nor yellow, That, nor red; 

Nor small nor very great nor short nor long; 

Formless, yet like a light, a star; 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 


152 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


Nor teacher, teaching, learner, what is learned; 
Nor thou nor I nor this expanded world; 

Conscious of its own form, from error free, 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Nor waking, mine, nor dream, nor dreamless sleep; 
Nor fire of life or heart or seeing soul; 

These three are of unwisdom; but the fourth, 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Even expanded for the sake of Self — 

Self, that, still perfect, on no other rests — 

All the wide world besides is little worth. 

That, the One, final, blest, alone, am I. 

Nor is this first with any second to it; 

Nor lonely this, nor yet has it compeers; 

Nor is this secondless One void or filled with aught; 
How shall I tell this perfect wisdom’s crowd? 


i 


xijmddd^y 


Appendix 

A Symposium on the Life of Sankaracharya 

Prepared for presentation by the Theosophical Club in the Temple 
of Peace at Point Loma. (Adapted from many sources) 

I love to think of those great beings, those royal-hearted 
Ones, who return to earth to shed their divine compassion 
in order to lift the veil into those inner realms of light for 
those who are ready to look within. Could we not recount 
among ourselves here tonight some of the strange legendary 
tales that have been woven about the life of Sankaracharya, 
who lived from 510 b. c. to 478 b. c.? For all that mystic 
lore is a magic tapestry woven of Truth itself. 

Have you ever heard of the portents that attended San¬ 
kara’s birth? It is said that the whole celestial host gave 
forth paeans of gladness. With no selfish or partial joy, 
but for the sake of religion they rejoiced, because creation, 
engulfed in the ocean of pain, was now to obtain perfect 
release. 

The mountains themselves were swayed by the wind of 
his perfect merit. On every hand the world was greatly 
shaken, as the wind drives the tossing boat; so also the mi¬ 
nutest atoms of sandal perfume, and the hidden sweetness 
of precious lilies floated on the air, and rose through space, 
and then commingling, came back to earth; so again the gar¬ 
ments of Devas descending from heaven touching the body, 
caused delightful thrills of joy; the sun and moon with con¬ 
stant course redoubled the brilliancy of their light, whilst 
in the world the fire’s gleam of itself prevailed without the 


156 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


use of fuel. Pure water flowed from springs self-caused, 
and rare and special flowers in great abundance bloomed 
out of season. 

And more marvelous still, whatever wealth was requisite, 
there did it appear upon earth. From the midst of the pure 
snowy mountains a wild herd of white elephants came of 
themselves without noise, not curbed by any, self-subdued, 
and every kind of colored horse, in shape and quality sur¬ 
passingly excellent, with sparkling jewelled manes and flow¬ 
ing tails, came prancing ’round, as if with wings. 

Among men enmity and envy gave way to peace. Content 
and rest prevailed on every side; whilst there was closer 
union amongst the true of heart. Discord and variance were 
entirely appeased, and all possessed themselves in harmony. 

Who was this babe that heaven and earth should thus 
give forth their bounty? Were not similar tales told of the 
childhood of the great Buddha? And have we not also 
been taught that Buddha and Sankaracharya are most close¬ 
ly connected? Both were Avataras of a high mystical order, 
though not belonging to the same class of these superior 
Beings. 

But to return to the marvelous boy himself. It is said 
that in his first year he acquired the Sanskrit alphabet and 
his own language. At the age of two he learned to read. 
At three he studied the Puranas and understood many por¬ 
tions of them by intuition. And in his seventh year, hav¬ 
ing attained all that his preceptor could teach him, he re¬ 
turned home. 

Nor was he lacking in occult powers at an early age. 
Once when his mother lay in a swoon, as he stood beside 
her he drew the river that flowed on the hither side of the 


APPENDIX 157 

field up out of its bed, that its pure waters might refresh 
her. 

Kings and others of high birth and intellect sought him 
even at this early age that he might teach them of secret 
wisdom never uttered except in guarded places. 

Do you know the tale of how he gained his mother’s con¬ 
sent to letting him become a holy ascetic? It runs in this 
wise: She with her mother’s pride in his lofty attainments 
of soul and mind, could not endure the idea that he should 
shut himself away from the beauties and pleasures of life, 
and firm was she in her refusal of his request. But the 
young Sankara could sometimes act with the wile of a young 
and clever god. So going down to the river one day to 
bathe he soon was alarming his mother by his cries for help. 
She ran to the river’s brink and saw that a great alligator 
held the boy’s foot in a deadly grip. In helpless agony she 
stood by the edge of the stream. Then said the boy, “The 
beast has imparted to me that if you will grant my request 
and let me become a holy ascetic, he will loosen his hold.” 
Whereupon the mother gave her consent, and the alligator 
with great tranquillity opened its jaws and released the 
youth, who clambered out of the river and lost no time in 
preparing to leave his home, giving over his mother into the 
care of friends and relatives, and telling her he would come 
back to her whenever she should need his presence. 

There was living at this time in a cave in the hillside 
near the Nerbudda River a sage, Govind Yati by name. 
Years ago Vyasa had appeared to him telling of the coming 
of a youth who would demonstrate the most miraculous 
powers. And so it came to pass. When Sankara left his 
mother he traveled for many days through forests, over 
hills, by towns and across rivers, led by an irresistible force, 


158 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 


he knew not what. After a time he found himself at the 
opening of the cave in the hillside where dwelt the sage 
Govind Yati. Straightway he became the pupil of the wise 
man and was taught the four great truths of Brahma, name¬ 
ly: Knowledge is Brahma, the soul is Brahma, Thou art 
That, and I am Brahma . Then one day as Govind Yati was 
immersed in contemplation a furious tempest arose. Violent 
thunder shook the heavens, the ethereal vault was riven 
with tongues of lightning; rain deluged the earth, and San¬ 
kara, without awaking his master, quelled the storm, as 
quietly as a child is soothed by the sound of sweet music. 
And when the sage returned to consciousness and learned 
of what had befallen, he was filled with great joy and said: 
“Thus has the prophecy of Vyasa been fulfilled/’ 

Then the sage blessed Sankara, and knowing that the 
youth’s sojourn with him had come to an end, bestowed his 
benediction upon him and bade him proceed to the holy city 
of Benares that he might there receive the blessing of the 
Deity. “Go,” said he, “on thy glorious work, then enter, 
and begin to save mankind!” 

Thus admonished, Sankara turned his steps to Benares, 
and here it was that he received his first pupil, Sanandana, 
the same who afterwards became celebrated as his greatest 
favorite under the title of Padmapada, he for whom the en¬ 
lightened youth reserved his greatest powers of instruction. 

Is there not a tale connected with the acquiring of the 
name Padmapada by this dear pupil? 

The chroniclers of old tell the story thus: There were 
among Sankara’s disciples some within whom envy was 
aroused at witnessing the unusual attachment that existed 
between the youthful sage and his cherished pupil. San¬ 
kara wished to dispel these envious feelings and show them 


APPENDIX 


159 

that it was through superior merit alone that Sanandana 
was chosen among them for higher instruction and closer 
communion with the Teacher. So standing one day on the 
banks of the river which ran near his dwelling-place, he 
called to Sanandana who stood on the other side among his 
companions, to come over to him directly. Sanandana forth¬ 
with without any hesitation and with dauntless spirit 
stepped upon the flowing waters of the river and moved to¬ 
wards his Teacher with stedfast and graceful mien. And lo! 
At each step a lovely lotus sprang from the bosom of the 
waters, trailing a starry line of blossoms behind him as he 
stepped lightly upon the bank. Then said Sankaracharya, 
as he embraced Sanandana; “Henceforth shall you be known 
among us as Padmapada, ‘He of the Lotus-path.’ ” 

But tarry a moment. Have we not run ahead of our 
story? It was many years ere this, indeed when he was but 
twelve years of age that he made his dwelling upon the banks 
of the Ganges and there wrote the great works that men who 
seek wisdom have studied ever since: his Commentaries on 
the Sutras, the Upanishads, and on the Bhagavad-Gita. In 
later years when Padmapada came to him bewailing the 
loss of one of his precious Commentaries which as it chanced 
had been destroyed by his uncle, Sankara without any per¬ 
turbation recited the contents of that which had been de¬ 
stroyed in the exact words familiar to all his pupils while 
Padmapada rewrote them as he spoke. 

Nor did such feats as this mark the limit of his mental 
powers. He was so wise and so well versed in the vast learn¬ 
ing of the Vedas, that his name was sounded as victor in 
all philosophical discussions and debates. Once he went to 
the city of Mahishmati where dwelt the sage Mandana Mis- 
ra. He was led towards the house of this wise man by a 


160 


THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 

number of parrots miraculously endowed with human speech, 
who, so the story runs, discoursed upon weighty philosophi¬ 
cal questions. But when he reached the door of the dwell¬ 
ing he found it fast shut. Undismayed he arose in the air and 
entered from above, alighting just beside Mandana Misra 
in his spacious hall. Then began an animated discussion 
between the astonished host and his unexpected guest. The 
sun rose high in the heavens and found them deep in their 
debate; it sloped down the sky in its westering course and 
yet the two, each of redoubtable intellect, continued. At 
length as evening crept upon them they called on the wife 
of Mandana Misra to act as umpire between them; but she, 
busy housewife that she was, deemed it not thrifty to let the 
hours pass attending to the discourse of word-spinners, so 
with ready wit she brought two garlands of fresh flowers 
saying: “Wear these as you talk, and he whose garland 
does not wither shall be deemed victor.” So the two each 
put on his garland and in no long time Mandana Misra’s 
was limp and faded like the leaves of a delicate tree be¬ 
neath the rays of the summer sun. But Sankara’s remained 
fresh as when first brought in at dewy eve. 

And that is but the beginning of the story, for the victor 
claimed his opponent as a disciple. And the wife — she 
we learn was none other than Sarasvati in corporeal form. 
Nor would Sankaracharya be content until he had held de¬ 
bate with her. Many were the questions put to him by his 
fair adversary, but always was he to the fore with a ready 
answer. Then Sarasvati, for so we may now call her, turned 
into a path of thought to which Sankara was an utter stranger. 
She asked him a question on the science of love! For the 
first time no answer was forthcoming, yet even such a ques¬ 
tion must be solved by the sage. So he left Mandana Mis- 


APPENDIX 161 

ra’s city in search of an answer. He traveled for some time 
with his disciples and came at length to a forest. 

Now it so happened that a certain king named Amaraka 
lay dying here at the foot of a tree surrounded by many 
friends mourning his departure. As the soul of the dying 
man took flight an unusual thing happened. Sankara left 
his own body, entrusting it to the care of his disciples. He 
entered that of the dead king, and the monarch’s followers, 
seeing their chief rise once again with the light of life in 
his eyes, were overjoyed beyond words, and went out of the 
forest of death back to the throne of royalty. 

There king Sankara, standing as it were in the shoes of 
Amaraka, and indeed Amaraka himself as far as the eye could 
discern, learned all that pertained to the science and art of 
love, and so fitted himself to answer the probing questions 
of Sarasvati. Meanwhile, however, the Ministers of State, 
finding their resuscitated rajan a far wiser and better man 
than ever before, suspected that there had been some such 
change of souls as we have described. They were loth to 
part with their new and wonderful king, so they issued a 
decree that the bodies of all those who had just passed on 
into the inner realms should be burnt. They hoped thereby 
that the mortal frame of this strange and beautiful being, 
now deserted, would be destroyed with the rest, and that 
thus he would remain a captive within the body of their king. 

Time sped on, and Padmapada and the other devoted 
disciples, knowing not of the decree of the Ministers of 
State, left the body of their beloved master entrusted to their 
care, and journeyed towards the king’s city. “Let us,” 
said Padmapada, “appear before the king as singers, and 
weaving a message around our sweet music, let us tell him 
how we long for his return.” It all came to pass as they had 


162 THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM 

planned; for as they stood before the supposed King Ama- 
raka in the great hall of the palace, not only were those who 
listened spellbound by their marvelous music, but its pel¬ 
lucid strains stole into the inner consciousness of Sankara- 
charya. Before the bewildered attendants knew what had 
befallen, Sankaracharya gratefully dismissed the singers and 
released himself from the corporeal chains that bound him. 
His own body he found already upon the funeral pyre sur¬ 
rounded by angry flames that seemed to reach to the very 
heavens. But it remained untouched by their destructive 
power, and entering it, Sankara, shining with the illumina¬ 
tion which streamed from his own being, descended from 
the pyre and rejoined his devoted pupils, and together they 
made their way to the house of Mandana Misra, who be¬ 
came a disciple of the young sage after hearing the last 
question of Sarasvati answered with keen wit and wisdom. 

From this time on the beautiful messenger of the gods, 
for such in truth he was, journeyed from city to city with 
his faithful followers, spreading wherever he went his teach¬ 
ings of the Vedanta. It was indeed a spiritual and intel¬ 
lectual conquest. His words among the populace, in the 
great cities or among the smaller towns and hamlets, in the 
forests or along the highways, were like the falling of the 
gentle rain after a season of drought and famine. His pre¬ 
sence was like the glory of the morning sunlight when the 
curtains of mist roll away from before the face of the sun. 

Many are the stories told of his godlike powers, but were we 
to recount these tonight, dawn would find us still gathered 
here telling tales — tales of his bringing back to earth the 
spirit of one departing, of his power to produce fire from the 
palm of his right hand, of his ability to send his conscious- 


APPENDIX 


163 


ness whithersoever he willed. Those who are ignorant call 
these wonder-works miracles. Those who have knowledge 
of things behind this veil of illusion about us, know San¬ 
kara to be the greatest Initiate living in historical ages; and 
to the Initiate Nature makes obeisance, laying at his feet 
the key to her innermost secrets. 

You have heard the words of one of the Wise Ones of the 
earth: “A few drops of rain do not make the monsoon, 
though they presage it.” Thus does Sankaracharya, unlike 
the ordinary mortal, perfected in wisdom, master of rare and 
occult powers, in appearance even like a god, stand as a 
prophecy of what we shall one day become in the far aeons 
of the future, yea, in that far distant time when the human 
host shall have made its long, long journey again and yet 
again through the seven spheres of its present home. 

Until his thirty-second year this Sage of the East 
journeyed, carrying from land to land the blessing of his 
divine philosophy. Then his term of life was at an end, and 
into those heavenly realms where in joy the gods awaited 
him he disappeared in this wise: he absorbed his gross body 
into the subtil one and became existent; then destroying 
the subtil one into the body which is the cause of the world, 
he became pure intelligence; then attaining in the world of 
the isvara full happiness, unbroken, like a perfect circle, 
he became the intelligence which pervades the whole uni¬ 
verse. Even now does he exist as the all-pervading intelli¬ 
gence. From above rang the grand paean of the gods echo¬ 
ing within the sacred places of the earth: “Victory!” 


I 


I 








. i 


