
Vedanta in Practice 


BY 

SWAMI PARAMANANDA 

AUTHOR OF "the PATH OP DEVOTION," 

"the way of peace and blessedness," 
"soul's secret door," 
"reincarnation and immortality," BTC. 



PUBLISHED BY 

THE VEDANTA CENTRE 

BOSTON, MASS., U. S. A. 

1917 







1917 

BT 

SWAMI PARAMANANDA 



THIS LlTTLl BOOK IS 

DEDICATED TO THE MEMORT OF MY BLESSED MASTER 

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA 

WHOSE PTJRE CHARACTER, UNSELFISH LOVE AND 
TEACHINGS OF TOLERANCE HAVE TIED THE BAST 
AND WEST IN SISTERLY BONDS OF LOVE 
AND SYMPATHY 




CONTENTS 

Page No. 


I. SPIRITUAL PRACTICE 11 

II. RIGHT DISCRIMINATION 23 

III. BUILDING OF CHARACTER 41 

IV. POWER OF CONCENTRATION . 59 

V. SELF-REALIZATION 73 


VI. SELECTIONS FROM UPANISHADS AND 
OTHER SCRIPTURE . 89 




PREFACE 

In giving religious instruction it is al- 
ways important to show how principles 
can be put into practice. People sometimes 
imagine that the principles are all and 
that when one has learnad them and can 
talk glibly about them, nothing further is 
necessary. This is as great a mistake as to 
suppose that looking at a well-spread 
table is all that is needed to satisfy hun- 
ger. Unless we not only eat the food, but 
also digest and assimilate it so that it be- 
comes part of our bodies, nourishing and 
preserving them, all the food in the world 
would be of little use to us. 

The aim of these lectures is to show us 
how to avail ourselves of the great prin- 



Prejace 


ciples of Vedanta, so that they will be- 
come part of our daily lives; to teach us 
how we can put them into practice and 
live by them every moment of our exist- 
ence. When we can thus assimilate them, 
they will nourish and sustain our spiritual 
nature, just as food preserves our physical 
frame. Vedanta is eminently practical, 
and each of the five lectures is designed to 
help the reader to put into practice the 
truth he has leaijied. They were given in 
response to the demand for instruction of 
this character, and they are sent out with 
the earnest hope that some may be helped 
by them. 




I 


SPIRITUAL PRACTICE 

mu6t always bear in mind the pur- 
pose of all spiritual practice: — ^that 
is, to open a channel within us by which 
we may feel the presence of God and see 
what is now invisible to us. The channel 
is opened when we are able to drop the 
consciousness of the little “I” and free 
our mind from impurities or from its at- 
tachment to material things only. So the 
whole object of our practice is to make us 
pure and humble, that we may approach 
God with openness of heart. There are 
various methods by which this may be ac- 
complished — ^by prayer, by meditation, by 
work, devotion, self-sacrifice and self-con- 
trol. If, however, we follow any one of 
these methods without remembering the 
purpose of it, it may produce just the re- 



12 


Spiritual Practice 


suit we are trying to avoid ; that is, it may 
stimulate the ego and thus prove a draw- 
back. No matter what we do, therefore, 
we must never lose sight of the fact that 
God is the Supreme Reality, the Highest 
Self; He is the only one to be depended 
on, not the lower self ; and constantly sur- 
rendering ourselves to Him in our thought 
will so purify us that we shall be able to 
find a connection or open a channel by 
which we may xmite ourselves with the 
Supreme. 

This is what is meant by religious prac- 
tice ; To have a definite consciousness re- 
garding the Real, regarding Spirit, not 
through books or through some one else, 
but through one’s own self. Each one must 
be able to awaken his own inner nature. 
He must be able to grasp the meaning of 
life, to perceive the existence of God di- 
rectly. That is the aim of all study and 
practice. A man who lives here and per- 




spiritual Practice 


13 


forms the duties of life must know the 
purpose of life ; he must know his relation 
with the Unseen Doer; he must under- 
stand the Force which is constantly work- 
ing within and without him. The science 
of Yoga teaches this. The very word sig- 
nifies man’s union with the Supreme. 
Until he has attained that union and feels 
that he is being guided by God along the 
right path, he cannot have any sense of 
security; and so long a§ he does not feel 
that he is safe, he cannot enjoy life. If, 
however, at every moment of his existence 
he is wholly devoted to the Supreme, then 
he can never feel separated from Him. 
When under all circumstances, in our 
waking and sleeping, we carry the thought 
of God and put it into all our actions, 
then we are living the spiritual life. 

The aim of the spiritual life is not to 
destroy our present life, but to enrich it, 
to make it fuller, more effective. We must 



14 


Spiritual Practice 


never think that we are abandoning or 
neglecting anything when we try to do the 
right thing towards our soul. On the con- 
trary, we cannot say that we are working 
for the world, if we do not pay proper 
attention to our own soul. This awaken- 
ing of soul-consciousness is the very first 
step that every individual being must take. 
And in that all the problems of life are 
included. When it is accomplished, then 
what we now regard as unseen becomes 
seen; what we now believe to be impos- 
sible becomes possible ; for as the channel 
opens, there comes the flow of Reality. 

At present the channel is blocked on 
account of our ignorance, or because per- 
haps we are unconsciously turning away 
from the Real. If there is a beautiful pic- 
ture before you, but you are looking in 
the opposite direction, you do not see it. 
And this is what bars the vision of Reality. 
We are constantly looking to the exter- 




spiritual Practice IS 

nal ; we are absorbed in the affairs of the 
outer world, without ever stopping to ob- 
serve what is happening within. But 
what happens in the outside world is 
nothing but the effect. If we want to con- 
trol the effect, we must find the cause. If 
we want to control death, we must know 
what life is. We cannot control death by 
simply thinking of death; we must find 
life. That is what philosophy teaches. A 
man who is running after the external 
must withdraw his mind from it so that 
he can get another point of view. The life 
of meditation or reflection within one’s 
own self does not mean laying aside our 
outer activities; it means gaining a new 
point of view, which is just as important 
— perhaps more important — than our 
present one, because it gives a truer grasp 
of life and leads to the cause of things. 
As we unfold our inner life, we are better 
able to adjust the outer. 



16 


Spiritual Practice 


The external or physical life becomes 
much easier when we understand our 
spiritual life, for it is through our spiritual 
life that we exist physically. Not being 
conscious of that fact, we try only to 
nourish the physical and the method we 
apply in giving nourishment also is not 
proper; that is why we feel such impover- 
ishment, such disappointment and help- 
lessness in our life. We are like a man 
who is charmed, with some special branch 
or flower or fruit of a tree. He waters 
that and bestows all his care on that, but 
he soon finds that it withers because he 
has not poured the water at the proper 
place— at the root of the tree. So it is with 
our relationship with God. Unless we take 
care of that, unless we water it with our 
devotion, our spiritual consciousness will 

wither and we shall feel keenly the death 
0 

of the objects on which our interest is 
focussed; but if we care for the root of 




Spiritual Practice 


17 


our life, then we do not have the same 
disappointment and suffering when we see 
the outer decay of things, because we know 
what is the Root and Source of our exist- 
ence and of our happiness. 

Yoga says: “By meditating on the Su- 
preme Being of the Universe, by wor- 
shipping Him, by offering all our prayers 
to Him, Who is free from all grief, all 
impurity, all ignorance. Who stands above 
the conditions of the m9rtal world. Who 
is the Supreme Source of all light, wis- 
dom and blessing ; by meditating on Him, 
the Yogi attains to that state of conscious- 
ness which is the goal of all spiritual prac- 
tice — the state of complete illumination,” 
There is no greater help for the limited 
mortal who is constantly trying to run 
away from his limitation, than to be con- 
scious of a Superior Power and to place 
himself voluntarily under the protection 
of that Power, In our practice, therefore. 


18 


Spiritual Practice 


if we can have something tangible, an 
Ideal upon whom we can call for guid- 
ance and help, with whom we can seek 
shelter, whose voice we are able to hear, 
whose presence seems a reality to us, very 
soon our concentration and meditation 
will take a definite form and this is ex- 
tremely helpful in the life of spiritual cul- 
ture. 

Often we try to imagine the Absolute 
and pray to Him, but it is not an easy thing 
for the untrained mind to concentrate 
steadily on the abstract. When, however, 
we can take some definite aspect of that 
Absolute Infinite Being, as it is described 
in the Scriptures: — God the Effulgent 
Spirit, Father and Mother of all living 
creatures ; the Giver of all blessings ; Pro- 
tector, Companion, greatest of all Friends, 
Who never fails us, because His friend- 
ship is not dependent on material condi- 
tions; Who gives His love freely to us. 




spiritual Practice 


19 


whether or not we are able to give our 
full share to Him: when we can look 
upon God in this way, then we are able 
to form a closer relation with Him and 
our spiritual consciousness is more 
quickly awakened. This is what the Yogi 
or devotee does. He takes an Ideal and 
through that establishes true friendship 
with the Supreme Deity. He asks for His 
aid when he is in difficulty, he makes Him 
his constant companion and treats Him 
as the nearest of all friends. When a 
definite form like that is fixed in the 
mind, it becomes easier to pray and 
meditate. 

Sri Ramakrishna used to say that those 
who are born with a certain established 
relationship with God are very fortunate, 
because they begin with something defin- 
ite. They are not going hither and thither 
searching in an indefinite way; but they 
already have an Ideal to start with and 



20 


Spiritual Practice 


therefore they find it natural to follow the 
spiritual path. But we can all have a 
definite Ideal in our mind, we can all 
make the spiritual life a reality to us, as 
real as our earthly life and earthly rela- 
tions. Now we depend upon earthly sup- 
port, but we can in the same way learn to 
find our support in God or Truth. As our 
spiritual nature unfolds and we grow more 
conscious of our relationship with the 
Supreme Spirit, we shall feel less and less 
bound by the material world; the fetters 
will fall off, as it were, of their own accord. 
All our imperfections will seem to drop 
away of themselves, as we come in contact 
with a Perfect Being. By merely disciplin- 
ing our mind and body we cannot gain 
perfection. A man may strive for ages to 
root out his physical and mental imper- 
fections, but even then he will not realize 
perfection. As, however, he thinks con- 
stantly of a Perfect Being, he absorbs the 




Spiritual Practice 


21 


attributes of that Being; or he opens a 
channel by which he establishes a relation- 
ship with the Und)dng, All-Knowing, All- 
Loving, Effulgent Spirit and thereby he 
breaks the bondage of material life. 

In the Bhagavad-Gita Lord Krishna 
tells His disciple that it is very necessary 
to subdue the senses and learn to control 
the body and mind; but He says again 
that although one may starve the senses 
and thereby deaden their feeling, one has 
not gained much spiritually because de- 
sires still linger in the heart ; when, how- 
ever, one has seen the Supreme, then all 
desires and limitations drop off forever. 
So whatever we do, whether we give dis- 
cipline to the body and mind or whether 
we turn our whole thought in the opposite 
direction^ we must not forget that the 
main object of all our practice is to edu- 
cate our inner being, to unfold our spirit- 
ual nature and to bring us face to face 


22 Spiritual Practice 

with the Supreme ; for He is the one real 
aim and object of all our search. 

When we meditate on Him with con- 
viction, then our heart becomes illumined 
with His Light and we attain super-con- 
sciousness, the consciousness which in- 
cludes all lesser forms of consciousness. 
As we go about our ordinary life, there- 
fore, we should sometimes stop, draw our- 
selves within and try to get the other point 
of view, to see that other aspect of our life. 
It is this balancing of the two sides and 
gaining a state of equilibrium which pre- 
pares our mind for the knowledge of the 
Supreme. So long, however, as it is over- 
powered by one aspect of life — the physi- 
cal and material — ^we can never know our 
inner being and our soul will be starved 
even though our body is fed. 



II 


RIGHT DISCRIMINATION 

j "^HRFE things are rare and only ob- 
tainable through the grace of the 
Supreme Being: human life, an earnest 
desire for liberation, and the helpful asso- 
ciation of the Holy.” So it is said by the 
great illumined Sage Sankara. Why 
should it be so.? Why should human life 
be considered so great? According to the 
conception of creation given in Vedanta, 
this human body is the greatest body in 
the universe. Man is not only greater 
than all animals, but greater even than 
the Dev as (angels). No other manifested 
form of life is greater than man, for man 
alone is in a fit position to attain perfec- 
tion. Even the Devas have to come down 
and take human bodies in order to gain 
perfection. The reason of this is that on 



24 


Right Discrimination 


the animal plane the mind is overpowered 
by matter and cannot go beyond the limits 
of the body, animals cannot think of 
higher things ; while the Devas, who are 
supposed to live in heaven, are too ab- 
sorbed in enjoyment to seek for freedom. 
Too much bodily pleasure ties us to the 
physical plane and obstructs our growth. 
It is only on the plane midway between 
these two that the highest spiritual attain- 
ment is possible. We find the same thing 
in human society. Those who have too 
much wealth and those who are stricken 
with extreme poverty both find it difficult 
to strive after higher things, for both con- 
ditions are serious impediments to the de- 
velopment of the soul. It is those who 
have neither too much nor too little who 
attain wisdom, because here alone do we 
find the forces of mind and body properly 
adjusted and balanced. This is the rea- 
son why the human state is so much es- 




Right Discrimination 


25 


teemed, because it stands between the ani- 
mal and the angel. 

Having a human body, the next thing 
is to feel a thirst for liberation. How 
many among us really desire freedom, 
although we are human beings? There 
are very few who strongly desire to search 
for the real and who realize that all exter- 
nal things are unreal. But those who 
strive earnestly and sincerely to find the 
way to freedom and who succeed in get- 
ting the helpful guidance of an illumined 
teacher, are indeed blessed and have ac- 
complished the purpose of human exist- 
ence. This is indeed the aim and object 
of human life, although the majority have 
forgotten it and have taken other things as 
their ideals. But there comes a moment 
in every one’s life when he cannot but 
turn toward the Truth. He alone is a 
true man who strives for liberation by 
conquering his lower nature. This human 



26 


Right Discrimination 


body is a privilege and those who, having 
obtained this privilege, do not put it to 
the right use miss their opportunity. 

What makes man greater than the ani- 
mals ? What makes one man greater than 
another? The intelligence or the power of 
understanding which he manifests. It is 
through the unfolding of the faculty of 
discrimination that man rises higher in 
thought and in wisdom. On the physical 
plane this faculty of discrimination is 
very little awakened. On the intellectual 
plane it is much more developed, but it 
is not fully revealed in a man until he has 
reached the realm of the spiritual. This 
discrimination is called in Sanskrit Viveka 
and is most important at every step of the 
spiritual life. Viveka means discriminat- 
ing between the real and the unreal, be- 
tween the true and the false. This world 
is a mixture. There are good things and 
evil things, there are beautiful things and 



Right Discrimination 


27 


ugly things, there ^re beneficial things and 
harmful things ; and we are placed in the 
midst of this turmoil of duality to find our 
way out to that state where there is no 
duality, but only one existence of Absolute 
Bliss. For this we need Viveka to help us 
and lead us in the right path. 

Without right discrimination we cannot 
make any progress whatsoever in the spir- 
itual life. Things of the world, fascina- 
ting to the senses and, appearing to be real, 
often lead us astray when we lack the 
power of discrimination. Hard indeed is 
the path of Samsara (earthly life) . Even 
the keenest human minds are sometimes 
deceived by the charm of Maya. Ignor- 
ance is the cause of all our misery and 
suffering, and ignorance exists because 
of non-discrimination. When we take the 
unreal for the real and cling to it, we meet 
with disappointment and thus suffer. We 
see everything constantly changing around 




28 


Right Discrimination 


us. The baby grows to boyhood, the boy 
becomes the man, who in his turn slowly 
approaches old age. The strong are weak- 
ened by desire and death comes to all. 
Yet all are clinging to this life and looking 
upon it as permanent. What can be the 
cause of this delusion except ignorance 
and forgetfulness of the True Self? We 
have identified the immortal Self with this 
little body which is bound to fall. “Ignor- 
ance is taking that which is non-eternal, 
impure, and non-Self, for the eternal, 
pure, blissful Atman (True Self).” Our 
present conception of the Self is nothing 
beyond the body. But the body cannot 
be the Self. The body can never become 
unchangeable or eternal. Whatever has a 
beginning must necessarily have an end. 
It cannot be otherwise. The body comes 
and goes, being a combination of matter, 
but the Spirit remains always, unchange- 
able and eternal. 




Right Discrimination 


29 


Once Indra, the head of the gods, and 
Virochana, the head of the demons, went 
to learn about the Self from Prajapati. 
They both studied with him for a long 
time. Then one day the master declared : 
“Thou art that. Thou thyself art that 
Self which thou art seeking.” Both of 
them were pleased and thought they had 
accomplished everything. They returned 
to their homes and gave the message to 
the people. The dempn, having naturally 
a clouded ignorant nature, could not 
understand the real meaning of the words 
of his master, but took them literally and 
thought this body was the Self. So he de- 
clared to his people : “Make the body well 
and strong by taking good food and exer- 
cise. Be happy. None is greater than 
ourselves. We are Brahman (the Su- 
preme).” Thus satisfied, he inquired no 
further. 

The god, however, had a much finer 



30 


Right Discrimination 


nature and he at once began to think: 
“Surely the master did not mean that the 
Self is this body. How can this body be 
the Self when it is so ephemeral, change- 
able and dependent on matter? The Self 
never changes.” So he returned to the 
master and asked: “Sir, did you mean 
that this body is the Self? I see that the 
body changes constantly and dies, while 
the Self is unchangeable and immortal.” 
The master replied calmly: “Thou art 
the Self. Find it out for thyself.” Then 
Indra thought that perhaps the vital forces 
were the Self. But soon he found that 
they grew weak if he did not nourish them 
properly. Yet he went back to his master 
to enquire if he meant the vital forces, but 
Prajapati answered in the same way. 
Then Indra thought that he must mean 
the mind; but he soon decided that the 
mind could not be the Self, since it is 
sometimes happy and sometimes unhappy. 




Right Discrimination 


31 


Thus through patient search and right 
discrimination and through the help of 
the master, the god attained knowledge of 
the Self — ^the Self which is neither body 
nor mind, but beyond both, “which sword 
cannot cut, which fire cannot bum, which 
water cannot melt, and air cannot dry, 
birthless, deathless, one, omniscient and 
all-pervading.” The God through proper 
discrimination reached the goal; while 
the poor ignorant demon missed it because 
of his fondness for the body and bodily 
pleasures. 

We need not go far to find out the signi- 
ficance of this story. In human society 
we find many, like the demon, whose 
thoughts do not go beyond the limits of 
the body and who are perfectly satisfied 
with sense pleasures. But there are a few 
gods too, who through discrimination are 
able to differentiate the real from the 
unreal and thus release the Soul from the 


32 


Right Discrimination 


bondage of matter. We can all become 
like gods and manifest Divinity within 
us, if we will only use this power properly. 
Similarly we can degrade ourselves to the 
animal plane, if we do not use it properly. 
Our progression or retrogression depends 
entirely upon ourselves, on our every 
thought and action. The Lord has given 
Ub the power of discrimination : if we use 
it we can rise higher ; but if we neglect it 
and allow ourselves to be led away by our 
momentary impulses, we obstruct our 
growth and remain almost as ignorant as 
the animals. “The tendencies of eating 
and sleeping, fear and sense-enjoyment 
are common to both human beings and 
animals. Human beings excel the brutes 
in knowledge and understanding, but 
those who lack in knowledge can be classi- 
fied with animals.” 

Some may think this an exaggerated 
statement, but it is not so. Much truth 



Right Discrimination 


33 


can be found in it when properly ana- 
lyzed. There are three planes of existence 
in this universe. The first is the physical 
or material plane, which is obvious in ani- 
mal life. The thoughts on this plane can- 
not go beyond the body and senses, and the 
mind naturally revolves in that narrow 
circle. The second is the plane of intellect, 
where human beings are supposed to 
stand. The tendency of intellect is to 
overcome all physical limitations and give 
man more power over himself and over 
nature in general. This is undoubtedly 
higher than the physical plane, but still 
higher and entirely beyond body and mind 
is another plane which is known as the 
spiritual plane. No amount of physical 
strength or intellectual keenness can bring 
us to this plane. It is here that we experi- 
ence supernatural powers, which can be 
gained neither through the senses nor the 
mind. 



34 


Right Discrimination 


These three planes of existence corres- 
pond to the three Gunas or states of mat- 
ter, called in Sanskrit Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas. Tamos is the lowest and is most 
manifest in animals. The nature of 
Tamas is darkness and dullness and when 
it predominates in man he becomes stupid 
and inactive. His mind is filled with evil 
propensities and he fails to distinguish be- 
tween right and wrong. Men of this class 
are very little removed from the animals, 
because they do not possess the power of 
proper judgment and their whole thought 
and action are centralized in their bodies. 
They often injure others to fulfill their 
selfish desires. But the intellect helps us 
to lift ourselves above this dull material 
plane. Through the intellect we become 
active and ambitious for happiness. This 
is the nature of Rajas. Rajas rouses our 
activity and thus helps us overcome all 
dullness. In this way through the power 




Right Discrimination 


35 


of reason we progress much. But soon we 
find that the human intellect falls back 
after reaching a certain point. Here we 
struggle hard to penetrate the wall which 
stands between us and the Unknown. 
But at last through the earnest struggle 
of the soul, a channel is opened which gives 
us the power to see inner things. This is 
the state of Sattva, where a man is neither 
satisfied by fulfilling his physical desires 
nor contented to remaiii within the limits 
of his intellect, but stands steadily keeping 
the balance between both. In this state 
alone can he discriminate properly. 
Sattva gives equilibrium and enables us 
to think and act rightly. 

According to the manifestation of these 
three qualities — Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, 
do we find all the differences in human 
beings. The man who possesses the quali- 
ty of Sattva or goodness, in him alone we 
see true fearlessness, uprightness, purity. 



36 


Right Discrimination 


truthfulness, forgiveness and the absence 
of all anger and passions. Through self- 
control he becomes peaceful and happy. 
And there is no other way to get peace. 
The man who follows the path of Rajas 
never finds any peace or rest, because there 
is no limit to human desires. The more 
we gratify them, the stronger they become. 
It is like adding fuel to the fire — ^we but 
make the flame stronger. How can we 
expect to find peace and happiness when 
we are overpowered by the darkness of 
Tamas or the unrest of Rajas? Through 
experience we gradually come to the con- 
clusion that we must learn to control our 
lower tendencies and manifest the highest 
quality of Sattva or goodness, by which 
alone we can hope to attain perfection. 
This is done by discrimination. Thus by 
showing us the right way and saving us 
from errors, discrimination becomes our 
true friend on the spiritual path. 




Right Discrimination 37 

Now the question is, how to cultivate 
this quality of Sattva? “By practice and 
non-attachment it is attained.” Proper 
food can help us here. By living on pure 
food we can change our bodies and gain 
Sattva elements. There are three main 
causes which make food impure. Some 
foods are impure by their very nature, like 
animal food; others are impure because 
polluted by some unclean foreign sub- 
stance; and still others J^ecome impure 
because touched by an unclean person. 
By avoiding these three sources of im- 
purity we can undoubtedly make our 
whole organism stronger and purer. But 
one thing we must always remember and 
that is that all external observances are 
only secondary. The real purity is inter- 
nal and only obtainable through the con- 
stant practice of unselfishness and chas- 
tity. When we lack discrimination there 
is great danger of falling into fanaticism. 


38 


Right Discrimination 


that most deadly of all foes to progress. 
If, however, we keep the goal steadily 
before our eyes and in our hearts, then 
we can overcome every obstacle that lies 
in our way. 

All outer observances regarding clean- 
liness, food, etc. are intended only as helps 
toward our spiritual development and 
should not be mistaken for the goal itself. 
So we must be ever watchful and guard 
ourselves from, attaching undue impor- 
tance to any merely external actions. 
Everything in this world has its legitimate 
use and also can easily be abused. There- 
fore we need to discriminate at every step 
in order to use our energies in the right 
direction. There is a story in India of a 
holy man who practised Yoga every day 
at certain hours. At these times he was 
much disturbed by a cat, so in order to 
have unbroken meditation he confined the 
animal in the next room. This went on 




Right Discrimination 


39 


for a long time, until finally he passed 
away leaving behind him a disciple. This 
disciple sought earnestly to imitate his 
master, and thinking that the animal had 
been an essential part of his master’s medi- 
tation, he spent much time trying to get 
a cat to tie in the adjoining room. 

We often make a similar blunder and, 
mistaking the non-essential for the essen- 
tial, waste our forces in vain. Most of 
our religious disharmonies are the direct 
result of these unassimilated ideas. Great 
souls do things with a certain purpose in 
view and their followers not understanding 
the true spirit of their actions, misinter- 
pret them, often to their own hindrance. 
Rituals and ceremonies should pot be our 
main object in worship, but should be re- 
garded only as helps towards the goal. If 
we make them our foremost consideration, 
we are easily misled and our growth is re- 
tarded. Let us then seek sincerely and 




40 


Ri^ht Discrimination 


watch carefully, always working with 
steadiness, perseverance, faith, and dis- 
crimination. Then through the Grace of 
the Lord we shall attain freedom. 




Ill 

BUILDING OF CHARACTER 

VERYTHING in this world is tran- 
^ sitory and fleeting. From the high- 
est manifestation of human life to the 
lowest worm all are destined to perish. 
No man was ever born jwho could stop his 
body from changing constantly. Body is 
the name of a series of changes. What 
remains, then, but character? Time 
swallows up everything except character; 
this is the only thing it cannot touch. 

If we look back and study the history of 
mankind, we find that, no matter how 
hard the struggle may have been to live 
here forever, in the end all have been con- 
quered by death. Emperors and kings 
have striven to build up something per- 



42 


Building of Character 


manent, but in vain. Look at the mighty 
Roman Empire, look at the wonderful 
Greek civilization, where are they? The 
one has crumbled into dust, the other lies 
in ruins. And what has outlived them? 
The message of Jesus Christ, the son of a 
carpenter, and that of the beggar Buddha. 
They are still ruling the universe. Mys- 
terious are the ways of the Lord. Those 
who wanted to live have died ; those who 
were willing to di^ have continued to live. 
Christ, who freely gave up His life, lives 
eternally. Buddha, who renounced a 
whole kingdom, rules over half the world. 

Why did these great Teachers re- 
nounce? Because they found that every- 
thing that is a combination of matter is 
destined to perish ; and they sought some- 
thing more permanent. When Christ was 
tempted by the devil. He cast aside the 
world because He well knew its hollowness 
and that it could never bring real happi- 



Building of Character 


43 


ness. So Buddh.^ resisted the temptations 
of Mara, because he had realized that this 
world could bring only sorrow in the end. 
Both of these great Souls valued character 
more than all else and devoted all their 
attention to that. They renounced or 
threw aside all material things knowing 
that character alone would live. 

One obvious thing in all spiritual char- 
acters is that they naturally tend toward 
renunciation, because.without it spiritual 
growth is impossible. This idea of renun- 
ciation is often misunderstood and the 
majority of human beings are even horri- 
fied by the mere mention of it. Yet we 
know that it forms the very foundation of 
spiritual life, and we see how all great men 
have drawn their inspiration and strength 
from this source. Show me one mighty 
spiritual character who did not sacrifice 
all selfishness and go through supreme re- 
nunciation. “You cannot serve both God 




44 


Building of Character 


and mammon.” There is great depth of 
meaning in this simple saying of the Lord, 
but we cannot grasp it as long as our hearts 
are weak and impure. What makes us 
weak and impure .? Dependence on matter 
and forgetfulness of the glorious spirit 
within; the more we love the world with 
all its vanities and depend on it, the weak- 
er we become. 

God is the source of all our strength and 
inspiration; but when we forget Him 
through the charm of matter, we become 
spiritually blind. Love of the world is 
blinding, while love of God is sight-giving ; 
the two cannot co-exist. You cannot have 
sincere love for God in your heart and at 
the same time fondness for worldly enjoy- 
ments. It is impossible, for they are as 
inharmonious as darkness and light. One 
only can exist at a time. So the Sages 
have declared boldly: Give up! Give up 
the world and love God, the Supreme 



Building of Character 


45 


Goal, from Whom we have come into ex- 
istence, in Whom we live, move and have 
our being. Do not forget Him, do' not 
neglect to serve Him. Love Him and serve 
Him and let all else go. 

This is the watchword of all religions 
and religious teachers. Single-hearted 
love for God is also the aim and object of 
renunciation. No violence or hardheart- 
edness is necessary in renunciation. It is 
a natural growth of tlje heart. When we 
love God with our whole heart and soul, 
there is no room for anything else and re- 
nunciation becomes easy. But renounc- 
ing does not mean running away from 
family, friends and relations, or being cruel 
to them. One can cultivate the spirit of 
renunciation in one’s home by practising 
non-attachment and unselfishness. The 
question may be asked. What do we gain 
by it? The highest reward, for there is no 
greater good than to love God above all 




46 Building of Character 

external things and to gain knowledge of 
the Supreme. 

Renunciation is one of the most impor- 
tant factors in the building of character. 
What is character? Every act or thought 
leaves an impression on the mind. All 
these impressions taken together make up 
the character. When a large number of 
similar impressions are left on the mind, 
they unite and become a habit. It is truly 
said that “habit is second nature.” In- 

o 

deed, Swami Vivekananda often remarked 
that it was all the nature we had. What 
we are to-day is the result of our past. 
This gives us great consolation and hope, 
because if what we do is only habit, then 
we can make or unmake it through our 
thoughts and deeds. 

There are two planes in this universe 
where our minds dwell. The Sat — ^the 
real, the permanently existent — and the 
Asat — ^the unreal, the fleeting, the non- 




Building of Character 


47 


existent. One’s standard of good and evil 
proceeds from these. Anything that is a 
combination of matter is Asat, that is, 
fleeting and changeable; when we cling 
ignorantly to such transitory things to 
gratify our momentary impulses, we be- 
come Asat, and it is such unsteady char- 
acters which we call bad. As, however, 
any one who is bad has become so through 
habit, through holding his mind on the 
plane of evil, so he can overcome this 
tendency by learning to hold his mind 
on the plane of good, by cultivating a good 
habit of thought. At first it will be diffi- 
cult for him and he will have to struggle 
hard ; but if he persistently looks only for 
the good everywhere, then in the end he 
is sure to conquer and his character will 
be transformed. 

Tills is undoubtedly not an easy task 
for any one, because however we may try, 
we are bound sometimes to come in con- 



48 


Building of Character 


tact with evil; especially is this true for 
those who live in the world and have to 
associate with all kinds of people. What 
are we to do then? How are we to over- 
come this difficulty? Patanjali’s advice 
is helpful: “Friendship, mercy, gladness, 
indiiference, being thought of in regard 
to subjects, happy, unhappy, good and evil, 
respectively, pacify the mind.” This is 
the real secret. It is evident that we can- 
not entirely avoid evil, but we can counter- 
act and remedy it by holding these four 
sorts of ideas regarding all things that 
come before us. We must hold the feel- 
ing of friendship toward all, and be merci- 
ful to those who are in misery. When 
others are happy we should feel happy too, 
and to the wicked and evil-minded we 
must be indifferent. If the subject is 
good, we must be friendly toward it, be- 
cause true friendship is only possible and 
desirable with good and sincere people. 




Building of Character 49 

We cannot give a friendly embrace to a 
tiger or a snake; the wisest thing is to 
avoid them. 

Then if the subject of thought is miser- 
able, we must be merciful toward it. 
When we see anybody suifer, we must try 
to remove his misery with a feeling of love 
and sympathy. This we must do with un- 
selfishness and non-attachment toward the 
fruits of our actions. Whether the one 
whom we help is grateful or otherwise 
matters not. Whenever we have the op- 
portunity of helping any one, we must 
bear in mind that it is for our good, for 
our own salvation. It is a privilege to 
serve God in the form of the miserable 
and thus build our characters and mani- 
fest Divinity. 

Next is gladness: we must be glad 
when others are happy. When any one 
becomes prosperous, victorious and suc- 
cessful, we must be happy to see him 




50 


Building of Character 


happy. Instead of entertaining the feel- 
ing of jealousy or hatred, we must rejoice 
in the joy of others. There is no peace or 
happiness in that heart which cannot 
stand the good fortune of others. 

The last and most difficult precept is to 
be indifferent to evil subjects. This is 
hard, because it needs immense self-con- 
trol to balance the mind and discrimi- 
nate rightly. The feelings of both love and 
hatred are natural, but indifference is 
very difficult to practise. We can love 
good, but we cannot love evil, however we 
may talk of loving all. There naturally 
rises the opposite, hatred, in our hearts. 
For instance, if a man does evil to us, we 
at once become disturbed and react by 
wanting to injure him. But thereby we 
gain nothing; we only lose our strength 
and energy. Every time we get angry or 
try to counteract evil by hatred we weaken 
ourselves and obstruct our spiritual 




Building of Character 


51 


growth. So one who possesses the power 
of discrimination and self-control can 
alone overcome this difficulty by feeling 
neither friendship nor animosity toward 
the evil object. 

When we hold our minds on the phy- 
sical plane, we become weak on the spirit- 
ual plane. To regain our spiritual strength 
we must withdraw our minds from the 
plane of matter. A great help to this is 
the company of the holy. .Even a moment’s 
association with great men will help us 
to cross over the ocean of worldliness. 
Who are great men? Those who are un- 
selfish, all-loving and who remain un- 
moved under praise or blame ; who live in 
this world not to gain any’thing for them- 
selves, but to serve and help mankind for 
love’s sake. When we come in contact with 
such lofty souls, a deep impression is 
made on our mind and this gradually 
changes the whole character. The very 




52 


Building of Character 


same man who was wicked may now be- 
come a saint. 

Although the company of holy men 
may do much to purify us and change 
our nature, however, character is after all 
what we form ourselves by our own hab- 
its of thought and by our own deeds. We 
alone are responsible for our characters. 
If we are now bad, we can change and be- 
come good. It all depends upon ourselves. 
But as long as )ve remain on the dual 
plane, on the plane of good and bad, there 
is danger of falling back. We must, there- 
fore, go beyond both and reach a state 
where our characters become perfect. 
Then neither good nor bad can any longer 
have an effect upon them; they remain 
untouched by either. This is the only 
thing that is permanent in this transitory 
world and until we have reached this state 
we are not free from danger. Thus a man 
who lives in solitude and tries to form his 




Building of Character S3 

character may appear to be perfect as long 
as he does not come into evil association, 
but he cannot be judged until he is seen in 
the midst of evil. That is the test. A per- 
fect character is one who can go through 
good and bad unmoved. As it has been 
beautifully expressed by Emerson : “It is 
easy in the world to live after the world’s 
opinion ; it is easy in solitude to live after 
our own ; but the great man is he who, in 
the midst of the crowd, ^eeps with perfect 
sweetness the independence of solitude.” 
This is the exact definition of a perfect 
man, who is always the same under all 
circumstances. 

We need both good and evil to form 
the perfect character; and the hard blows, 
which we call evil, often help us more than 
the good. If we look at the lives of great 
men, they seem to have gained most from 
blows, from adversity. Good is necessary 
too, but we must especially try to be 


54 


Building of Character 


steady when we come in contact with 
evil. These great men first overcame evil 
by practising the good, and then they rose 
still higher, where they could not be 
touched by either good or evil — ^where 
neither moved them. 

Such a character was Suka, who was 
the son of a great sage and born perfect. 
At an early age his father sent him to the 
court of King Janaka to learn. In order 
to test him the kjing gave certain instruc- 
tions beforehand to his courtiers, and 
when the boy arrived at the gate of the 
palace he was allowed to sit there three 
days and three nights without being no- 
ticed even by the guards of the palace. 
Then high officials came and received him 
with royal honor. Still his face did not 
change ; he remained unmoved. When at 
last he was led before the king, the king 
gave him a cup of milk, full to the brim, 
and told him to carry it seven times 




Building of Character 


55 


around the hall without spilling a drop. 
In the midst of music and dancing the 
boy walked seven times round the hall 
with the same calm face and without spill- 
ing one drop of the milk. Then the king 
said to him: “You have nothing more to 
learn. You have known the Truth. Go 
home to your father.” 

The only true help that you can render 
to mankind is when by your very charac- 
ter you teach others. Then you do good 
by your every word, your every move- 
ment. When, for instance, you remain 
steady under all conditions of good and 
evil, those around you le^rn the value of 
steadiness and begin to try to practise it 
themselves. Thus by the example of your 
character your whole life becomes a lesson 
to others. In the Sacred Writings of 
Vedanta we read of a youthful illumined 
spiritual teacher and an aged grey-haired 
disciple seated under a banyan-tree. The 



56 


Building of Character 


disciple’s mind was full of doubts and he 
questioned, but the teacher kept silent and 
the disciple’s doubts were gradually dis- 
pelled. Such is the force of character. It 
speaks louder than language. Its power is 
wonderfully effective — more than any- 
thing in this universe. 

Purity has been the foundation of all 
truly great characters. If you build a 
house on the sand, it is sure to tumble 
down; similarly, if we build our charac- 
ters on anything but purity, they will not 
stand. Impurity is a mixture; purity is 
one without a second. Mixed thoughts 
are seeing many; pure thought is when 
you see only One. When you think of any 
one’s evil side, you yourself take that evil ; 
just as when you meditate on a saint, you 
gain saintliness. What you think you be- 
come. When we realize how much we lose 
by dwelling on the plane of evil, we grow 
watchful and hold the mind only on the 




Building of Character 


57 


plane of good and see in everything the 
All-pervading God. If we wish to save 
ourselves, we shall have to struggle hajd, 
we shall have to regain inch by inch what 
we have lost by dwelling on the evil in the 
world. 

But it may be said, every one has mixed 
feelings — sometimes good, sometimes bad. 
How can we get out of this state? By 
using the power of discrimination, by 
constantly training the mind to distin- 
guish the right from the wrong and to 
seek only the good. This is the practical 
life. Building of character is the only true 
practice of Yoga, and it is the only way 
we can really help humanity. Christ 
helped the world by His character. It is 
not that He turned this earth into a 
heaven. This is not possible. There was 
just as much evil in the world after He 
came as before, but by His example He 
is helping each individual soul to over- 


58 


Building of Character 


come its limitations and to strive toward 
perfection. 

Neither Christ nor Buddha, nor any 
other prophet, claimed to be an exception. 
On the contrary, they preached that all 
can become like them. We can all attain 
the same perfection. But only when we 
build our characters on the firm founda- 
tion of purity, unselfishness and non- 
attachment, will they remain unshaken 
in all the varying conditions of life and 

c 

prove a living benediction to our fellow- 
beings. 




IV 


POWER OF CONCENTRATION 

T^TISDOM is the goal of human exist- 
* * ence. Even men of the lowest intel- 
ligence want to know the secret of things ; 
because knowledge alone can bring peace 
and happiness to our souls. Ignorance is 
the main source of all misery and no one 
really enjoys being in that state. Why do 
we find so many ignorant, irresponsible 
people around us then, if all are eager for 
wisdom? Because, although the desire for 
wisdom is the natural instinct in every 
human heart, few possess the power of 
acquiring it. A man who is inactive, 
stupid and full of ignorance has every 
desire to be all-knowing, only he does not 
want to work to gain knowledge. There 
are others who are capable of work and 
are immensely active, but who do not 



60 


Power of Concentration 


know the secret of work and only exhaust 
their energies in wrong directions. The 
door of knowledge is ready to open to 
every one of us if we only know how to 
knock at it properly. 

There is only one way to knowledge 
and wisdom and that is through the 
power of concentration. Without this 
power nobody can accomplish anything 
in this world. The students who can con- 
centrate their minds fully on their books 
are the best students. With the least 
effort they accomplish the most. The sci- 
entist in his laboratory concentrates all 
the energies of his mind in one direction 
and thus discovers the secrets of Nature. 
I’he astronomer fixes his mind, through 
his telescope, on sun, moon, planets, and 
they give up their secrets to him. He is a 
good musician who can concentrate his 
mind on his music. So also with artists 
and every one. This is the only road to 




Power of Concentration 


61 


knowledge. The more we can concentrate 
our minds on the subject of our study, the 
more rapidly the knowledge of that sub- 
ject is revealed to us. Let us see then how 
to acquire this power of concentration, 
since all our wisdom is based on it, es- 
pecially spiritual wisdom. 

Concentration lies at the foundation of 
the whole system of Yoga practice. Pa- 
tanjali, in his Yoga Aphorisms, defines 
Yoga as “restraining th^ mindstuff from 
taking various forms.” This is only pos- 
sible through the power of concentration. 
What is the present state of our minds.? 
If we properly analyze, we shall find that 
they take innumerable forms. Sometimes 
one’s mind is happy, again unhappy; 
sometimes angry, and again quiet. It is 
always restless. If we are a little careless 
and let the mind run, it will perhaps travel 
thousands of miles away this minute and 
will begin dreaming of various impres- 



62 


Power of Concentration 


sions of the past which will make it accord- 
ingly happy or unhappy. This is precisely 
the condition of our minds. 

Among those of you who have read 
Swami Vivekananda’s Raja Yoga, some 
perhaps remember how the mind is com- 
pared to a maddened monkey. “There was 
a monkey, restless by his own nature, as 
all monkeys are. As if that were not 
enough, some one made him drink freely 
of wine, so that hp became still more rest- 
less. Then a scorpion stung him. When 
a man is stung by a scorpion he jumps 
about for a whole day, so the poor monkey 
found his condition worse than ever. To 
complete his misery, a demon entered 
into him. What language can describe 
the uncontrollable restlessness of that 
monkey? The human mind is like that 
monkey, incessantly active by its own 
nature; then it becomes drunk with the 
wine of desire, thus increasing its turbu- 




Power of Concentration 63 

lence. After de''ire takes possession, 
comes the sting of the scorpion of jeal- 
ousy of others whose desires meet with 
fulfillment; and, last of all the demon of 
pride takes possession of the mind, mak- 
ing it think itself of all importance.” 
Such is the general condition of the mind. 
How hard it is to control such a mind! 
Nobody can do this for us. We can get 
many helpful suggestions from our teach- 
ers, but we can achieve .self-mastery only 
through our own efforts. It must be our 
own work. 

Arjuna, the disciple, after listening to 
the wonderful teaching of the Gtta from 
his Master, Krishna, said: “This Yoga of 
even-mindedness taught by Thee, I see 
not its steady continuance, because of the 
restlessness of my mind.” To that the 
Blessed Lord replied: “Doubtless, O 
Mighty-Armed, the mind is restless and 
hard to restrain, yet by constant practice 


64 


Power of Concentration 


and dispassion it is subdued.” There is 
no other way. We ourselves must accom- 
plish the work of subduing the mind by 
our perseverance and unfailing practice. 
Yogis, or spiritual men, through their 
careful study have found out all the va- 
rious intricate tendencies of the mind and 
body, and also how one can subdue them 
through different practices of concentra- 
tion and so attain absolute self-mastery. 

Our mind manifests itself in various 
forms: Kshipta, Mudha, Vikshipta and 
Ekdgra. Kshipta means scattered. We 
often find our mind in this stage when our 
thoughts are various and the mind jumps 
from one thing to another. This is a 
state of activity and the mind runs after 
sense pleasures. But no real peace or 
happiness can be found while it is in this 
scattered state. The nature of the second 
is dullness, inactivity, and one becomes in- 
discriminative and injures others. Next is 



Power of Concentration 


65 


Vikshipta or the state in which we struggle 
to centralize the mind, but often without 
success. When we do not find satisfac- 
tion either in the scattered or dull state 
of mind, then we begin to struggle for 
some higher form. If we persevere we 
reach the state of Ekagra, the concen- 
trated or one-pointed mind. Only when 
the mind arrives at this state do we attain 
to superconsciousness and become free 
forever. The first threa states are not 
fitted to bring spiritual realization. But 
in the last stage, through the power of 
concentration, we can collect all our 
mental and physical energies and direct 
them toward the highest realization. 

When the mind is not concentrated, it 
is weak and we cannot accomplish any- 
thing with it. Oui mind in the first three 
states is like thin fibres which are scat- 
tered and separated one from the other ; it 
cannot stand any pressure, but breaks 



66 Power of Concentration 

easily. But when through the power of 
concentration we are able to wind our 
scattered thoughts into one cord, then we 
are able to resist all distractions, even as 
twisted fibres can resist the strength of 
an elephant. 

The value of concentration is unques- 
tionable. It helps every one in every stage 
of life. But the greatest man is he who 
can concentrate his mind on the Supreme 
Reality, for “we. become exactly what we 
think.” Intense thought forms our ex- 
ternal and internal nature. This we can 
often see in the case of a devoted hus- 
band and wife; they become like each 
other in their manners, nay, even in their 
appearance. This fact is very obviously 
shown in the life of Saint Francis of As- 
sisi, who by constantly concentrating his 
mind on Jesus the Christ grew to be like 
Christ. It is even said his external figure 
became transformed and showed the 




Power of Concentration 


67 


marks of the stigmata. Such is the power 
of concentration that it can change the 
whole nature of a man. By concentrating 
our minds on a pure, holy being we be- 
come holy. Similarly, when we turn our 
thoughts to material objects, we become 
materialistic. 

It is comparatively easy to concentrate 
our minds on external objects, but it is very 
difficult to turn our thoughts on things 
within. Very few have the patience or 
courage to do it. We must take some defi- 
nite object on which to concentrate, and 
then go on practising till we have fully 
subdued all other thoughts but that one. 
For instance, take the thought of unself- 
ishness or purity. Fill your whole being 
with that one thought, think of nothing 
but that, dream of nothing but that, and 
feel nothing but that, then you will even- 
tually become pure and unselfish. At first 
many thoughts will rise in opposition. 


68 


Power of Concentration 


But every time you attempt to subdue 
them you will find yourself stronger, and 
gradually through constant practice you 
will conquer them fully. Real Yoga prac- 
tice is when we try to collect our thoughts 
from all sources, make them one and con- 
nect them with our Inner Self. Yoga 
means this union with the Supreme Self 
which destroys all ignorance. We cannot 
feel this union, or have the vision of the 
Self, until our mind is wholly subdued 
and quiet, like the calm surface of a lake. 
As long as there are ripples in the form 
of innumerable desires, we cannot see the 
bottom where the Atman or True Self 
dwells. So our duty is to practise with pa- 
tience and perseverance until we have 
succeeded in making our mind one- 
pointed and have subdued all mixed and 
wandering thoughts. 

This is not the work of a day, but may 
take years, nay, lives. Progress, however, 



Power of Concen tration 69 

depends entirely upon our earnestness. 
There are degrees of earnestness and our 
success varies accordingly, as is shown by 
different temperaments. Some are exceed- 
ingly slow In their nature and do not have 
any power of determination or persever- 
ance; while others are wonderfully ener- 
getic and ready to sacrifice even their 
lives in their attempts. Sri Ramakrishna 
gives a parable to this effect of two peas- 
ants who were working in their fields to 
bring water. The wife of one came and 
asked her husband to leave his work until 
the next day. As it was late, the man after 
a little hesitation gave up and went home. 
The wife of the other came and urged 
him and scolded him, but the man was 
determined to finish his work. At last, 
after ^ whole day’s toil, he was able to 
bring the water into his field and could 
take his rest in peace, knowing his task 
had been accomplished. So long as we 


70 


Power of Concentration 


lack in steadfastness and discrimination 
and waste our energies by jumping from 
one thing to another, we cannot succeed 
in an5^hing. No matter what path we 
follow, we must learn to be steady and 
faithful; without this no knowledge is 
obtainable. “There is no wisdom to the 
unsteady, and no meditation to the un- 
wise, and to the unmeditative no peace; 
to the peaceless how can there be happi- 
ness?” 

What is meditation? Meditation is a 
constant remembrance of the object we 
meditate upon. It is described as like 
“an unbroken stream of oil poured from 
one vessel to another.” When we attain 
to this kind of remembrance in relation 
to the Supreme Being, then all the bonds 
of the heart break and it becomes illu- 
mined by the presence of the Self. 
Through meditation we feel the nearness 
of Divinity. There is no other way to 




Power of Concentra tion 71 

reach Him. No e'iternal power can give 
us the vision of God. Because He is the 
nearest of all friends, nearest of anything 
that we can perceive. “He is greater 
than the greatest, smaller than the small- 
est, and He dwells in the core of every 
heart.” As long as we try to see Him 
outside of us, we never find Him, all our 
struggles are in vain. But when by ex- 
perience we find it impossible to see Him 
outside of us, then we turn our thoughts 
within and become meditative. 

In each of us there are two tendencies 
— ^the centrifugal and the centripetal. 
The one drives us toward external ob- 
jects, the other draws us inward. The 
one scatters our energies and weakens 
us, the other helps us to centralize them 
and makes us strong. When through the 
power of concentration we are able to 
subdue all our various disturbing 
thoughts and desires, then we get the 


72 Power of Concentration 


vision of the Supreme Self seated on the 
altar of our hearts. Then alone all 
crookedness will be straightened out and 
all doubts about the Self will vanish for- 
ever. We shall be supremely blissful, 
knowing that we and the Father are one. 




V 

SELF-REALIZATION 


R ealization is the watchword of 

all religions. If there is a God, 
we must see Him; if there is a Supreme 
Self, we must realize It. Otherwise these 
theories about the existence of God and 
the Soul have very lijtle value. If we 
cannot put them on a practical basis and 
realize the truth of them, they remain for 
us but mere words. This realization is 
the only thing that can bring satisfac- 
tion to us. No amount of theory can 
ever satisfy our minds. Unless we can 
see the reality of things for ourselves, we 
can never find satisfaction. The various 
methods of joining words, the various 
methods of speaking in beautiful lan- 
guage, the various methods of expound- 



74 


Selj-Realization 


ing the Scriptures cleverly are only for 
the enjoyment of the learned, but they 
never lead to spiritual realization, nor 
can they ever bring freedom. What use 
is there in studying the Scriptures if we 
thereby gain no spiritual wisdom? Study- 
ing means to get the directions which lead 
to the ultimate goal; and when we for- 
get that, we do not gain any profit what- 
soever, though we may spend our whole 
life in reading alj the Scriptures of the 
world. There is a saying in India that 
“As a donkey carries loads of sandal- 
wood on his back, only feeling the weight 
of the burden without getting the bene- 
fit of the sweet perfume, so it is with 
those who study innumerable Scriptures 
without knowing the essence — the truth 
— of them.” 

There is a great deal of difference be- 
tween a philosopher or a man of book- 
learning, and a Seer-of-Truth or a man 




Self-Realization 


75 


of realization. The philosopher may have 
studied all the Vedas and other Scrip- 
tures and may be able to quote long pas- 
sages from them, but the Seer-of-Truth 
knows because he has seen. The first 
merely repeats what he has learned; the 
second says, “Yes, I know!” Thus his 
words are bold. Experience is the real 
and only way of acquiring strength. Real 
strength comes through realization; 
when a man has seqn God he can de- 
clare with conviction that there is a God. 
When we have seen a thing, no matter 
how much people may deny the existence 
of that thing, we can still stand up boldly 
and declare, “I know it exists.” 

We hear and read about the immortal 
nature of our Soul, yet we are all the 
time afraid of dying. Why is that? 
Because we have no conception of our 
true nature; we have no realization of 
the Self, the real man. In fact we 


76 


Self-Realization 


have no idea what Soul means. Our 
knowledge is limited to this material 
body; and if we try to form any idea 
of ourselves, we only do it through this 
limited body which is subject to con- 
stant changes. So, however we may study 
and however we may talk about the 
immortal nature of our Self; nay, how- 
ever we may repeat Sohuni (I am He) 
and other sacred words; it all carries 
very little weight, without the realiza- 
tion of the ultimate meaning of these 
things. In India parrots are trained to 
repeat holy names and as long as they 
are unmolested they will repeat them; 
but no sooner does a cat come after them 
than they give their natural cry, for- 
getting all about the names they have 
been taught. Similarly, people repeat the 
words of the Scriptures without compre- 
hending their meaning; and that is why 
when trouble comes, they are so miser- 




Self-Realization 


77 


able, so weak, so much in fear of death. 
But when we realize the Self, when we 
perceive It as we perceive the existence 
of those around us, we can no longer 
doubt. Then fear of death or of disease 
will cease to exist. 

Nature has no influence on the Su- 
preme Self of man, which is in reality- 
one and the same with God, so Self- 
realization and God-vision are not two 
different things. Man is the expression 
of God and God is the reality of man. 
Real man and God are inseparable. 
There is only one reality in this universe, 
whom the devotee worships as a Per- 
sonal God, and a Jnani or wise man as 
his own Self. The difference is only in 
names and methods of reaching the goal ; 
but when the goal is reached, both come 
to the same understanding — that there 
is but One by Whom everything is per- 
vaded. “This Atman is not to be real- 



78 


Self-Realization 


ized by the intellect, nor by words, nor 
by hearing from many sources; but by 
him by whom this Atman is beloved, by 
him alone is the Atman realized.” The 
thing necessary for us is to feel intense 
love in our hearts for this Supreme Self 
or God; otherwise He is not attainable. 
There is no other way that man can 
reach unto God, except through love — 
love always unites. This love for God 
comes unto those blessed beings who are 
pure in heart, from whom all attach- 
ment for unreal things, all selfish desires 
have vanished. This purity of heart and 
love for God are the sum and substance 
of all religious teachings. 

We may spend the whole of our lives 
searching earnestly for Truth in temples, 
in churches and in books; but without 
understanding the significance of these 
fundamental teachings all these efforts 
will be in vain. Religion is practical and 




Self~Realization 


79 


those who observs the practical side of it 
realize the Truth. You may not know 
how to read a single book, but if you 
have known the Truth which is behind 
them, you are much better off than the 
so-called philosopher who may speak in 
beautiful language but who has no real- 
ization whatsoever. It is a dangerous 
thing to hear the Truth from one who 
has not realized, for he will only bring 
confusion in the mind;, but one who has 
realized will teach with very few words. 
Swami Vivekananda says in one of his 
lectures that he who has something to 
give, gives it in most simple language; 
but one who has nothing to give, he 
sometimes writes two volumes to ex- 
pound one word. So we see that we can 
gain nothing when we come in contact 
with such pec^le; they only confuse our 
brain. 

He who has attained illumination does 


80 


Self-Realization 


not need to use many words. His fife 
itself is an answer to all questions, for 
the sun of wisdom always shines in his 
heart. This makes one bold; before this 
strength all other strength is insignifi- 
cant. When Alexander the Great was in 
India, he met a sage with whose wisdom 
he was so deeply impressed that he 
wished to carry him back to Greece, but 
the sage refused to go. The king offered 
him wealth and honor; still he refused. 
Then at last growing angry, the king 
said: “If you do not come, I will kill 
you!” At this the sage smiled and re- 
plied: “King, you never said anything 
more foolish. You cannot kill me — me 
whom sword cannot pierce, whom fire 
cannot burn, whom water cannot melt, 
and air cannot dry. I am an eternal, 
indestructible Soul 1” Such strength 
comes when we attain to Self-realization ; 
then we never depend on anything or 



Sel^-Reali%ation 


81 


anybody and we become absolutely 
fearless. 

But it is very difficult for those who 
identify themselves with the body and 
have strong attachment for sense-pleas- 
ures to realize the Self which is beyond 
all limitation. You remember the story 
of the two seekers after Truth who went 
to a saint to learn about the Self. The 
saint gave the same teaching to both: 
“Tat twam asi [Thou ^re That] — the 
Lord does not exist apart from you ; find 
Him out yourself within yourself.” The 
one, owing to his density and fondness 
for the body, understood the saying of 
the saint to mean that his material body 
was the Self; but the other was finer in 
nature, and through his earnestness and 
sincere inquiry came to realize the Self, 
which is beyond body, mind, senses and 
all human limitations. Too much fond- 
ness for the body creates bondage and 



82 


Selj-Realization 


obstructs our spiritual growth. At the 
same time, those who neglect to take 
proper care of their bodies retard their 
spiritual growth and may even make it 
impossible, as is seen in some individual 
cases where the body is broken down by 
practising too much asceticism. This 
body should be regarded as an instru- 
ment through the help of which we are 
to work out our salvation. For that 
reason we must take all necessary care 
to keep it well and strong, but without 
thinking it all in all. The human body 
is compared to a Vina (string instru- 
ment) which produces beautiful music 
when properly tuned. In order to tune 
properly we need to use moderation; if 
we put too much pressure on the strings, 
they give way ; and if we put no pressure 
at all, no music is produced. In the same 
way, if we use discrimination, we can 
save ourselves from being radical mate- 



Self-Realization 


83 


rialists or extrema ascetics. Our aim and 
object are neither the body nor bodily 
enjoyment, but to gain that knowledge 
of the Self which will bring us absolute 
freedom. 

We try to get happiness in this world, 
but nothing can give it unless we have 
found it within ourselves. That which 
is consciousness in the world is the Self 
and in That alone we find all our true 
happiness and bliss. Who cares for the 
material body? We all love the Self, no 
matter whether we know it or not. We 
all love that consciousness which is the 
Self of man. As long as that conscious- 
ness dwells in the body, we care for the 
body; but the moment the spirit leaves, 
we no longer care for the empty shell. 
We may not recognize this fact because 
of our weakness born of living on the 
material plane. We follow the regular 
process of physical life and we train our 



84 


Self-Realization 


children to do the same. The young are 
taught to study a little, later to earn 
money, then to marry and seek pleasure 
and material prosperity. This is the reg- 
ular routine of life and those who do not 
wish to follow it are looked upon as 
eccentric. But are people helped by this 
method of education.? No! It makes 
them weak and dependent, because it 
binds them to the material plane. True 
moral strength will come only when we 
depend on our true Self. You wish to 
make your children moral ; but to do this 
you must hold up before them the right 
ideal, which alone will give them real 
strength. Do not give them the weaken- 
ing thought that they must depend on 
material things for their happiness; but 
tell them from their childhood that they 
are Spirit and not the physical body; 
that they are the Immortal Self, which is 
above all external conditions. Only thus 




Selj-Realization 


85 


will you make tnem strong. No weak 
person can realize the Supreme Self. 
At present we think ourselves weak and 
we have become so, but let us cease to 
think it and all weakness will drop off. 
Do not remind any one of his weakness. 
Make even a criminal feel the best that 
is in him. If you wish to help any one, 
do not regard his weak side, but call out 
all that he has of good; only so will you 
help him to realize hii better nature. 
However hard it may be, we must all 
seek realization, for in that alone shall 
we find real peace. 

There are different paths which we may 
take to attain this end, but all lead to 
the same goal. Supreme Realization. One 
who merely works for the Lord gets this 
realization; another does it by faith in 
the same Lord; while the Jnani who 
travels by tTie path of “neti, neti’* (not 
this, not this) also reaches Him. As 



86 


Selj-Realization 


when you enter a dark room to get some 
article, you pass from one object to an- 
other, saying “Not this,” until you find 
the thing you want, then you cease your 
search ; so also the Jnani puts aside one 
worldly object after another until he 
finds that for which he was searching, 
and so attains the goal. Thus the first 
class — ^the workers — ^by entire unselfish- 
ness, by giving all their labor freely with- 
out thought of personal gain, making 
every deed an act of worship, are purified 
in heart and attain realization. The sec- 
ond class — ^the Bhaktas or devotees — ^by 
worshipping the Lord with intense single- 
hearted devotion reach union with the 
Divine Object of their worship and attain 
realization. The third class — the Jnanis 
— take the hardest way to reach the goal. 
Rigid self-control and constant self- 
denial alone can carry them on the way. 
Only the strong, mentally and physi- 




Self-Realization 87 

cally, can travel by this road; but he who 
is determined and perseveres to the end 
arrives at realization of the Self. He 
sees It dwelling in every living thing, 
and thus seeing the Self everjnvhere and 
knowing his oneness with It, he cannot 
hate or injure any being. 

This realization is the goal of all 
mankind. We are all struggling to reach 
it, though we may not know it. Some 
have already learned how transitory are 
the things of the world and are searching 
for something more permanent, more 
real; others still cling to the objects of 
the senses ; but sooner or later all must 
come to this one goal. “Because this 
perception of the Self alone cuts all the 
knots of our hearts, destroys all doubts, 
and removes all the binding effect of 
karma.'* 

Having once enjoyed the vision of the 
Supreme, we become really blessed; we 



88 


Self-Realization 


no longer depend on the outside world, 
but we dwell within ourselves and become 
Self-satisfied. The one object of all the 
religious teachings of the world is to 
bring unto us this realization. Though 
the path may be hard and difficult to 
tread, yet let us march on with real 
faith and perseverance, and never give 
up through fear or discouragement. Let 
us never forget the call of the awakened 
souls who have found out the way of 
Immortal Bliss, but let us “Arise ! awake, 
and stop not till the goal is reached !” 




VI 

SELECTIONS 
FROM UPANISJIADS AND 
OTHER SCRIPTURES 




DISCRIMINATION 

good is one thing, the pleas- 
ant another ; these two, having dif- 
ferent objects, chain a man. It is well 
with him who clings to the good ; he who 
chooses the pleasant, misses his end.” 

“The good and the pleasant approach 
man: the wise goes round about them 
and distinguishes them. Yea, the wise 
prefers the good to the pleasant, but the 
fool chooses the pleasant through greed 
and avarice.” 

“Thou, O Nachiketas, after ponder- 
ing all pleasures that are or seem de- 
lightful, hast dismissed them all. Thou 



92 


Discrimination 


hast not gone into the road that leadeth 
to wealth, in which many men sink.” 

“Wide apart and leading to different 
points are these two — ignorance, and 
what is known as wisdom. I believe 
Nachiketas to be one who desires knowl- 
edge, for even many pleasures did not 
tear thee away.” 

“He [the Self] of whom many are 
not even able to hear, whom many even 
when they hear of Him do not compre- 
hend; wonderful is a man, when found, 
who is able to teach Him [the Self] ; 
wonderful is he who comprehends Him, 
when taught by an able teacher [man of 
realization].” 


rr—Katha Upanishad. 




GOD AND MAN 

“^J^WO birds, inseparable friends, cling 
to the same tree. One of them 
eats the sweet fruit, the other looks on 
without eating. 

“On the same tree naan sits grieving, 
immersed, bewildered by his own impo- 
tence. But when he sees the other Lord 
[Isa] contented, and knows his glory, 
then his grief passes away.” 

“When the Seer sees the brilliant 
Maker and Lord [of the world] as the 
Person who has His source in Brahman, 
then he is wise, and, shaking off good 
and evil, he reaches the highest oneness, 
free from passions.” 



94 


God and Man 


“For He is the Breath shining forth in 
all beings, and he who understands this 
becomes truly wise, not a talker only. 
He revels in the Self, he delights in the 
Self, and, having performed his works 
[truthfulness, penance, meditation, etc.], 
he rests firmly established in Brahman, 
the best of those who know the Truth.” 

— M undaka-U panishad. 




REALIZATION 

“N OR is that Self to be gained by one 
who is destitute of strength, or 
without earnestness, or without right 
meditation. But if a wise man strives 
after it by those means [by strength, 
earnestness, and right meditation], then 
his Self enters the home of Brahman.” 

“When they have reached Him [the 
Self], the sages become satisfied through 
knowledge; they are conscious of their 
Self, their passions have passed away, 
and they are tranquil. The wise, having 
reached Him, who is omnipresent every- 
where, devoted to the Self, enter into Him 
wholly.” 



96 


Realization 


“Having well ascertained the object of 
the knowledge of the Vedanta, having 
purified their nature by the Yoga of re- 
nunciation, all anchorites, enjoying the 
highest immortality, become free at the 
time of the great end [death] in the 
worlds of Brahma.” 

— Mundaka-U panishad. 

“The first results of Yoga they call 
lightness, healthiness, steadiness, a good 
complexion, an easy pronunciation, a 
sweet odor, and slight excretions.” 

“As a metal disk [mirror] tarnished 
by dust shines bright again after it has 
been cleaned, so is the one incarnate per- 
son satisfied and free from grief after he 
has seen the real nature of the Self.” 

“And when, by means of the real 
nature of his Self, he sees, as by a lamp, 



Realization 


97 


the real nature of Brahman, then, hav- 
ing known the Unborn, Eternal God, who 
is beyond all natures, he is freed from 
all fetters.” 

“Let us know that highest great Lord 
of lords, the highest Deity of deities, the 
Master of masters, the highest above as 
God, the Lord of the World, the 
Adorable.” 

— SvetasvatQror-Upan ishad. 


THE “DHAMMAPADA”; OR 
PATH TO VIRTUE 

A ll that we are is the result of what 
we have thought: it is founded on 
our thoughts, it is made up of our 
thoughts. If a man speaks or acts with an 
evil thought, pain follows him, as the 
wheel follows the foot of the ox that 
draws the carriage. 

All that we are is the result of what 
we have thought: it is founded on our 
thoughts, it is made up of our thoughts. 
If a man speaks or acts with a pure 
thought, happiness follows him like a 
shadow that never leaves him. 

The virtuous delights in this world, and 
he delights in the next; he delights in 
both. He delights and rejoices when he 
sees the purity of his own work. 
Earnestness is the path of immortal- 



The "Dhammapada’* 


99 


ity, thoughtlessness the path of death. 
Those who are in earnest do not die; 
those who are thoughtless are as if dead 
already. 

Having understood this clearly, those 
who are advanced in earnestness, delight 
in earnestness and rejoice in. knowledge 
of the elect. 

If an earnest person has roused him- 
self, if he is not forgetful, if his deeds 
are pure, if he acts with consideration, 
if he restrains himself, and lives accord- 
ing to law — ^then his glory will increase. 

By rousing himself, by earnestness, by 
restraint and control, the wise man may 
make for himself an island which no 
flood can overwhelm. 

These wise people, meditative, steady, 
always possessed of strong powers, attain 
to Nirvana, the highest happiness. 

If you see a man who shows you what 
is to be avoided, who administers re- 



100 


The "Dhammapada” 


proofs, and is intelligent, follow that wise 
man as you would one who tells of hid- 
den treasures ; it will be better, not worse, 
for him who follows him. 

Do not have evil-doers for friends, do 
not have low people for friends: have 
virtuous people for friends, have for 
friends the best of men. 

Few are there among men who arrive 
at the other shore; the other people 
here run up and down the shore. But 
those who, when the law has been well 
preached to them, follow the law, will 
pass over the dominion of death, however 
difficult to cross. 

There is no suffering for him who has 
finished his journey, and abandoned grief, 
who has freed himself on all sides, and 
thrown off all fetters. 

The gods even envy him whose senses, 
like horses well broken in by the driver, 
have been subdued, who is free from 




The "Dhammapada*' 


101 


pride, and free from appetites ; his 
thought is quiet; quiet are his word and 
deed, when he has obtained freedom by 
true knowledge, when he has thus be- 
come a quiet man. 

If a man holds himself dear, let him 
watch himself carefully; during one at 
least out of the three watches a wise man 
should be watchful. 

Let each man direct himself first to 
what is proper, then let him teach oth- 
ers; thus a wise man will not suffer. 
If a man makes himself as he teaches 
others to be, then, being himself well 
subdued, he may subdue others ; for one’s 
own self is difficult to subdue. 

He who gives himself to vanity, and 
does not give himself to meditation, for- 
getting the real aim of life and grasping 
at pleasure, will in time envy him who 
has exerted himself in meditation. 

Let a man leave anger, let him for- 




102 


The *‘Dhaminapada'' 


sake pride, let him overcome all bond- 
age! No sufferings befall the man who 
is not attached to name and form, and 
who calls nothing his own. 

He who holds back rising anger like 
a rolling chariot, him I call a real driver ; 
other people are but holding the reins. 

A man is not learned because he talks 
much ; he who is patient, free from 
hatred and fear, he is called learned. 

A man is not* a supporter of the law 
because he talks much ; even if a man has 
learnt little, but sees the law bodily, he is 
a supporter of the law, a man who never 
neglects the law. 

A man is not an elder because his head 
is grey; his age may be ripe, but he is 
called “Old-in-vain.” 

He in whom there is truth, virtue, pity, 
restraint, moderation, he who is free 
from impurity and is wise, he is called 
an elder. 




The *‘Dhammapada" 103 

“These sons belong to me, and this 
wealth belongs to me,” with such 
thoughts a fool is tormented. He himself 
does not belong to himself; how much 
less sons and wealth? 

The fool who knows his foolishness is 
wise at least so far ; but a fool who thinks 
himself wise, he is called a food indeed. 




SHIVO HUM 

TRANSLATION FROM THE 
SANSKRIT 

BY SWAMI VIVEKANANDA 

I AM neither body nor changes of the 
body; 

Nor am I senses or object of the senses. 
I am Existence Absolute, Knowledge 
Absolute, Bliss Absolute; 

I am He, 1 am He. 

(Shivo Hum, Shivo Hum.) 

I am neither sin nor virtue; nor temple, 
nor worship; 

Nor pilgrimage, nor books. 

I am Existence Absolute, Knowledge 
Absolute, Bliss Absolute; 

I am He, 1 am He. 

(Shivo Hum, Shivo Hum.) 



Shivo Hum 


105 


I have neither death, nor fear of death ; 
Nor was I ever born, nor had I parents. 
I am Existence Absolute, Knowledge 
Absolute, Bliss Absolute; 

I am He, I am He. 

(Shivo Hum, Shivo Hum.) 

I am not misery, nor ever had I misery ; 
I am not enemy, nor had I enemies. 

I am Existence Absolute, Knowledge 
Absolute, Bliss Absolute; 

I am He, 1 am He. 

(Shivo Hum, Shivo Hum.) 

I am without form, without limit, be- 
yond space, beyond time ; 

I am in everything ; 1 am the basis of the 
universe; everywhere am I. 

I am Existence Absolute, Knowledge 
Absolute, Bliss Absolute; 

I am He, I am He. 

(Shivo Hum, Shivo Hum.) 




MOHA-MUDGARA 

OR 

HAMMER TO DELUSION 


W HO is thy wife? Who is thy son? 

How curipus is this world! 

Who art thou thyself — and whence 
comest thou? 

Think on the truth of these things, O 
Brother. 

Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 
Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 

Even from a son comes dread to the rich, 
is a common proverb. 

Take no pride in having riches, or youth, 
or family-retainers. 



Moha-M udgara 


107 


Time steals them all away in a moment ; 

full of illusion is all this — 

Giving up these enter into the path of 
Brahman, and enter into it quickly. 
Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 
Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 


Giving up lust, anger, greed and all 
attachment. 

Think, Brother, who art thou thyself in 
reality ; 

One who is devoid of self-knowledge, 

He suffers agony in the lightless cell. 

Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 

Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 

In enemy and friend, in son, in relations. 

Strive not to make either strife or peace. 

But keep an even heart toward all 

If thou desirest to attain the stage of 
omnipresence in a moment. 




108 


Moha-Mudgara 


Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 
Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 


Unstable as the drop of water on the 
lotus-leaf, 

So is this life extremely impermanent. 
The company of sages — even for a mo- 
ment — ^in this world 

Proves a boat in crossing the sea of this 
Samsara. 

Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 
Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 


Day and night, evening and morning. 
Autumn and spring coming again and 
again. 

Time playing — life going. 

Even then not quenched the hope of the 
life-breath. 

Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 
Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 




Moha-Mudgara 


109 


The body becomes wrinkled, the head be- 
comes grey, 

The mouth becomes toothless, the staff 
trembles in hand; 

Even then the jar of hope remains un- 
broken. 

Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 

Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 

A child engaged in play. 

When youth engaged in making love. 

In old age merged in anxiety — 

Not one is engaged in contemplation of 
the Supreme Brahman. 

Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 

Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 

As long as there is birth, there is death — 

So Ipng is Mother’s womb lying (rebirth). 

This is the obvious object of this world. 

How in this world, 0 man, can be your 
happiness ? 




110 


Moha-Mudgara 


Worship the Lord. Worship the Lord. 
Worship the Lord, fool that thou art! 

On! on! and waver not until the Ideal 
is realized. No rest, friend, till that abode 
of peace is found. The heart may sink 
with despair when even the hardest 
struggle brings no good result. Yet that 
is the point where we most need to show 
our strength, because that is the test of 
life. From surface to bottom religious 
truths teach but one thing, and that is 
strength, self-reliance. Let us all pray to 
the Supreme sincerely and earnestly to 
open unto us the gate of light, strength 
and wisdom. May He grant unto the 
followers of all religions, nay, to all liv- 
ing beings. His peace and bliss. Peace! 
Peace! Peace! 





